CHAPTER 33
RULES OF THE ROAD IN GENERAL
Subchapter
A. General Provisions
B. Right-of-way
C. Turning, Starting and Signals
D. Special Stops Required
E. Stopping, Standing and Parking
F. Speed Restrictions
    Enactment.  Chapter 33 was added June 17, 1976, P.L.162, No.81, effective July 1, 1977, unless otherwise noted.
    Cross References.  Chapter 33 is referred to in section 1614 of this title.
SUBCHAPTER A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec.
3301. Driving on right side of roadway.
3302. Meeting vehicle proceeding in opposite direction.
3303. Overtaking vehicle on the left.
3304. Overtaking vehicle on the right.
3305. Limitations on overtaking on the left.
3306. Limitations on driving on left side of roadway.
3307. No-passing zones.
3308. One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
3309. Driving on roadways laned for traffic.
3310. Following too closely.
3311. Driving on divided highways.
3312. Limited access highway entrances and exits.
3313. Restrictions on use of limited access highways.
3314. Prohibiting use of hearing impairment devices.
3315. Passing and overtaking streetcars.
3316. Prohibiting text-based communications.
3316.1. Prohibiting use of interactive mobile device.
3317. Platooning (Repealed).
§ 3301.  Driving on right side of roadway.
    (a) General rule.--Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway except as follows:
     (1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceedingin the same direction where permitted by the rules governing such movement.
     (2) When an obstruction exists making it necessary todrive to the left of the center of the roadway, provided the driver yields the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute a hazard.
     (3) When and where official traffic-control devices are inplace designating a lane or lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for the movement indicated by the devices.
     (4) Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
     (5) When making a left turn as provided in sections 3322
(relating to vehicle turning left) and 3331 (relating to
required position and method of turning).
     (6) In accordance with section 3303(a)(3) (relating toovertaking vehicle on the left).
    (b) Vehicle proceeding at less than normal speed.--
     (1) Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less thanthe normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway.
     (2) This subsection does not apply to:
     (i) A driver who must necessarily drive in a laneother than the right-hand lane to continue on his intended route.
     (ii) A pedalcycle operating in accordance with Chapter35 (relating to special vehicles and pedestrians).
    (c) Pedalcycles.--
     (1) Upon all roadways, any pedalcycle operating inaccordance with Chapter 35, proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway.
     (2) This subsection does not apply to:
     (i) A pedalcycle using any portion of an availableroadway due to unsafe surface conditions.
     (ii) A pedalcycle using a roadway that has a width ofnot more than one lane of traffic in each direction.
(Feb. 2, 2012, P.L.27, No.3, eff. 60 days)
Cross References.  Section 3301 is referred to in sections
3306, 3307, 3505 of this title.
§ 3302.  Meeting vehicle proceeding in opposite direction.
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
Cross References.  Section 3302 is referred to in sections
1535, 3326, 3327 of this title.
§ 3303.  Overtaking vehicle on the left.
    (a)  General rule.--The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the limitations, exceptions and special rules stated in this chapter:
     (1) The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicleproceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left of the other vehicle at a safe distance and shall stay to the left of the other vehicle until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
     (2) Except when overtaking and passing on the right ispermitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall not increase the speed of the vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle and shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable signal.
     (3) The driver of a motor vehicle overtaking a pedalcycleproceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left of the pedalcycle within not less than four feet at a careful and prudent reduced speed. (b)  Suitable signal defined.--Suitable signal for purposes of subsection (a)(2) shall be as follows:
     (1) At all times when head lamps are required to belighted according to section 4302 (relating to the period for requiring lighted lamps), an audible signal or the intermittent flashing of low and high beams except that the use of high beams shall not be permitted when a vehicle is approaching from the opposite direction within 500 feet.
     (2) At all other times, an audible signal.
(Feb. 2, 2012, P.L.27, No.3, eff. 60 days)
2012 Amendment.  Act 3 added subsec. (a)(3).
Cross References.  Section 3303 is referred to in sections
1535, 3301, 3307, 3326, 3327 of this title.
§ 3304.  Overtaking vehicle on the right.
    (a) General rule.--The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under one of the following conditions:
     (1) When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to makea left turn, except that such movement shall not be made by driving off the berm or shoulder of the highway.
     (2) Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement ofsufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaken vehicle, except that such movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
    (b) Limitation.--No passing movement under this section shall be made unless the movement can be made in safety.
Cross References.  Section 3304 is referred to in sections
1535, 3326, 3327 of this title.
§ 3305.  Limitations on overtaking on the left.
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center or marked center line of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and, in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.
Cross References.  Section 3305 is referred to in sections
1535, 1603, 3307, 3326, 3327 of this title.
§ 3306.  Limitations on driving on left side of roadway.
    (a) General rule.--No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under any of the following conditions:
     (1) When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or acurve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
     (2) When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing anyintersection or railroad grade crossing, unless otherwise indicated by official traffic-control devices.
     (3) When the view is obstructed upon approaching within
100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
    (b) Application of section.--This section does not apply under the conditions described in section 3301(a)(2),(3),(4) and (5) (relating to driving on right side of roadway).
Cross References.  Section 3306 is referred to in sections
1535, 1603, 3326, 3327, 6506 of this title.
§ 3307.  No-passing zones.
    (a) Establishment and marking.--The department and local authorities may determine those portions of any highway under their respective jurisdictions where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and shall by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when the signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings. Signs shall be placed to indicate the beginning and end of each no-passing zone.
    (b) Compliance by drivers.--Where signs and markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in subsection (a), no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark a no-passing zone throughout its length.
    (b.1)  Overtaking pedalcycles.--It is permissible to pass a pedalcycle, if done in accordance with sections 3303(a)(3) (relating to overtaking vehicle on the left) and 3305 (relating to limitations on overtaking on the left).
    (c)  Application of section.--This section does not apply under the conditions described in section 3301(a)(2) and (5) (relating to driving on right side of roadway). (Feb. 2, 2012, P.L.27, No.3, eff. 60 days)
2012 Amendment.  Act 3 added subsec. (b.1).
Cross References.  Section 3307 is referred to in sections
1535, 1603, 3326, 3327, 6109 of this title.
§ 3308.  One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
    (a) Establishment and marking.--The department and local authorities with respect to highways under their respective jurisdictions may designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices.
    (b) Driving on one-way roadway.--Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices.
    (c) Driving around rotary traffic island.--A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the island.
Cross References.  Section 3308 is referred to in sections
3745.1, 6109 of this title.
§ 3309.  Driving on roadways laned for traffic.
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others not inconsistent therewith shall apply:
     (1) Driving within single lane.--A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
     (2) Three lane roadways.--Upon a roadway which is divided
into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn, or where the center lane is allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices.
     (3) Lanes limited to specific use.--Official trafficcontrol devices may be erected to restrict the use of specified lanes to specified classes or types of traffic or vehicles, including multioccupant vehicles or car pools, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
     (4) Prohibitions against changing lanes.--Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on a section of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
Cross References.  Section 3309 is referred to in sections
1603, 3326 of this title.
§ 3310.  Following too closely.
    (a) General rule.--The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
    (b) Combinations of vehicles and trucks.--The driver of any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle or of any truck when traveling upon a roadway outside of an urban district and following a motor vehicle drawing another vehicle or following a truck shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the space without danger, except that this subsection does not prevent a motor vehicle drawing another vehicle or prevent a truck from overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles.
    (c) Caravans and motorcades.--Upon any roadway outside of an urban district, motor vehicles being driven in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy space without danger. This subsection does not apply to funeral processions, which shall not be interrupted by any vehicle other than an emergency vehicle. (Aug. 5, 1991, P.L.238, No.26, eff. imd.)
1991 Amendment.  Act 26 amended subsec. (c).
Cross References.  Section 3310 is referred to in sections
1535, 1603, 3326, 3327, 8532 of this title.
§ 3311.  Driving on divided highways.
    (a) General rule.--Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space, physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices, police officers or appropriately attired persons authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section except through an opening in the physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection as established.
    (b) Traffic-control devices regulating turns.--Whenever
necessary for the protection and safety of traffic, official traffic-control devices may be installed at an opening in the physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection prohibiting or regulating a turn or turns as may be necessary pursuant to the authority of this title. § 3312.  Limited access highway entrances and exits.
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access highway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
    Cross References.  Section 3312 is referred to in section 3327 of this title.
§ 3313.  Restrictions on use of limited access highways.
    (a) General rule.--The department may regulate or prohibit the use of any limited access highway by any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic.
    (b) Traffic-control devices at entrances.--The department, when adopting any prohibition under this section, shall erect and maintain official traffic-control devices at the entrances to the limited access highway on which the prohibitions are applicable and when in place no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on the devices.
    (c) Motorcycles.--Except on busways in counties of the first or second class, motorcycles may be operated upon any limited access highway in an urban district in a lane specified for multioccupant vehicles or car pools, except where the department can demonstrate that such use will create a safety hazard.
    (d) Driving in right lane.--
     (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) and unlessotherwise posted, upon all limited access highways having two or more lanes for traffic moving in the same direction, all vehicles shall be driven in the right-hand lanes when available for traffic except when any of the following conditions exist:
     (i) When overtaking and passing another vehicleproceeding in the same direction.
     (ii) When traveling at a speed greater than thetraffic flow.
     (iii) When moving left to allow traffic to merge.
     (iv) When preparing for a left turn at anintersection, exit or into a private road or driveway when such left turn is legally permitted.
     (2) Unless otherwise posted, no vehicle or combinationover 10,000 pounds may be driven in the left-hand lane of a limited access highway having three or more lanes for traffic moving in the same direction except when preparing for a left turn at an intersection, an exit or into a private road or driveway when such left turn is legally permitted.
(Apr. 29, 1994, P.L.148, No.25, eff. 60 days; June 25, 1999, P.L.164, No.23, eff. 180 days; June 26, 2001, P.L.734, No.75, eff. 60 days)
2001 Amendment.  Act 75 amended subsec. (d).
1994 Amendment.  Act 25 added subsec. (c).
§ 3314.  Prohibiting use of hearing impairment devices.
    (a) General rule.--No driver shall operate a vehicle while wearing or using one or more headphones or earphones.
    (b) Exception.--This section does not prohibit the use of hearing aids or other devices for improving the hearing of the driver, nor does it prohibit the use of a headset in conjunction with a cellular telephone that only provides sound through one ear and allows surrounding sounds to be heard with the other ear, nor does it prohibit the use of communication equipment by the driver of an emergency vehicle or by motorcycle operators complying with section 3525 (relating to protective equipment for motorcycle riders), nor does it prohibit motorcycle operators complying with section 3525 from wearing or using one or more headphones or earphones or protective headgear with the same capabilities.
(Mar. 29, 1984, P.L.159, No.31, eff. imd.; May 20, 1993, P.L.30,
No.10, eff. 60 days; July 6, 1995, P.L.315, No.48, eff. 60 days;
Nov. 6, 2025, P.L.152, No.43, eff. 60 days)
2025 Amendment.  Act 43 amended subsec. (b).
§ 3315.  Passing and overtaking streetcars.
    (a) General rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the driver of a vehicle may not overtake and pass to the left of a streetcar proceeding in the same direction, whether the streetcar is actually in motion or temporarily halted to receive or discharge passengers, if overtaking or passing requires driving in a lane normally used by traffic moving in the opposite direction.
    (b) Streetcar stopped to receive or discharge passengers.--The driver of a vehicle may not overtake and pass a streetcar which has stopped to receive or discharge passengers on the side on which passengers board or alight until the doors of the streetcar are closed and passengers who are discharged have reached the side of the highway.
    (c) Applicability.--This section shall not be applicable to locations where streetcars are operating on tracks located within a median section of the roadway separated from the roadway by curbs or other physical barriers. (May 11, 2006, P.L.159, No.37, eff. 60 days)
2006 Amendment.  Act 37 added section 3315.
§ 3316.  Prohibiting text-based communications.
    (a) Prohibition.--No driver shall operate a motor vehicle on a highway or trafficway in this Commonwealth while using an interactive mobile device to send, read or write a text-based communication while the vehicle is in motion. A person does not send, read or write a text-based communication when the person reads, selects or enters a telephone number or name in an interactive mobile device for the purpose of activating or deactivating a voice communication or a telephone call.
    (b) Emergency use exception.--Texting while driving shall be permissible by a driver of a motor vehicle if necessary to communicate with a law enforcement official or other emergency services to prevent injury to persons or property.
    (c) Seizure.--The provisions of this section shall not be construed as authorizing the seizure or forfeiture of an interactive mobile device, unless otherwise provided by law.
    (d) Penalty.--A person who violates subsection (a) commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50.
    (d.1)  Prohibition on similar citations.--A person may not be charged with a violation of section 3316.1 (relating to prohibiting use of interactive mobile device) concurrently with a violation of subsection (a) for an offense committed at the same time and place.
    (e) Preemption of local ordinances.--In accordance with section 6101 (relating to applicability and uniformity of title), this section supersedes and preempts all ordinances of any municipality with regard to the use of an interactive mobile device by the driver of a motor vehicle.
    (f) Definition.--As used in this section, the term "text-based communication" means a text message, instant message, electronic mail or other written communication composed or received on an interactive mobile device.
(Nov. 9, 2011, P.L.406, No.98, eff. 120 days; June 5, 2024,
P.L.366, No.18, eff. 12 months)
    2024 Amendment. The preamble of Act 18 provided that Act 18 may be referred to as Paul Miller's Law.
Cross References.  Section 3316 is referred to in sections
3316.1, 3732, 3732.1 of this title.
§ 3316.1.  Prohibiting use of interactive mobile device.
    (a) Motor vehicle.--Except as provided under subsection (b), no driver shall use an interactive mobile device while driving a motor vehicle.
    (b) Emergency use exception.--Using an interactive mobile device shall be permissible by a driver of a motor vehicle if necessary to communicate with a law enforcement official or other emergency services to prevent injury to persons or property.
    (c) Penalties.--Except as provided for in subsection (g), a person who violates this section commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50.
    (d) Preemption of local ordinances.--In accordance with section 6101 (relating to applicability and uniformity of title), this section supersedes and preempts all ordinances of any municipality with regard to the use of an interactive mobile device by a driver of a motor vehicle.
    (e) Seizure.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the seizure or forfeiture of an interactive mobile device, unless otherwise provided by law.
    (f) Law enforcement education.--The department, in consultation with the Pennsylvania State Police, shall develop and electronically distribute education materials for law enforcement on how to effectively detect distracted drivers, regardless of age, sex, race or ethnicity, who violate this section.
    (g) Warning period.--For the first 12 months after the effective date of this subsection, a driver who violates subsection (a) may only be issued a written warning for a violation.
    (h) Prohibition on similar citations.--A person may not be charged with a violation of section 3316 (relating to prohibiting text-based communications) concurrently with a violation of subsection (a) for an offense committed at the same time and place.
    (i) Definitions.--As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
    "Driving."  Operating a motor vehicle on a highway, including while the motor vehicle is temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic control device or other momentary delay. The term does not include operating a motor vehicle if the driver moved the vehicle to the side of or off of a highway and halted in a location where the vehicle can safely remain stationary.
"Use an interactive mobile device."  As follows:
     (1) Using at least one hand to hold, or supporting withanother part of the body, an interactive mobile device.
     (2) Dialing or answering an interactive mobile device bypressing more than a single button.
     (3) Reaching for an interactive mobile device in a mannerthat requires a driver to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 CFR 393.93 (relating to seats, seat belt assemblies, and seat belt assembly anchorages) and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer's instructions.
(June 5, 2024, P.L.366, No.18, eff. 12 months)
    2024 Amendment.  Act 18 added section 3316.1. The preamble of Act 18 provided that Act 18 may be referred to as Paul Miller's Law.
Cross References.  Section 3316.1 is referred to in sections
3316, 3732, 3732.1 of this title.
§ 3317.  Platooning (Repealed).
    2022 Repeal.  Section 3317 was repealed November 3, 2022, P.L.1946, No.130, effective in 240 days.
SUBCHAPTER B
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec.
3321. Vehicle approaching or entering intersection.
3322. Vehicle turning left.
3323. Stop signs and yield signs.
3324. Vehicle entering or crossing roadway.
3325. Duty of driver on approach of emergency vehicle.
3326. Duty of driver in construction and maintenance areas or onhighway safety corridors.
3327. Duty of driver in emergency response areas and in relationto disabled vehicles.
3328. Unmarked police vehicles.
3329. Duty of driver in litter enforcement corridors.
§ 3321.  Vehicle approaching or entering intersection.
    (a) General rule.--When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the rightof-way to the vehicle on the right.
    (b) Exception.--The right-of-way rule established in subsection (a) is not applicable:
     (1) on through highways, where the traffic on the throughhighway shall have the right-of-way;
     (2) on limited-access highways, where the traffic on thelimited-access highway shall have the right-of-way;
     (3) in traffic circles, where the traffic in the trafficcircle shall have the right-of-way; and
     (4) as otherwise provided in this part.
(Dec. 11, 1986, P.L.1530, No.166, eff. 60 days)
    Cross References.  Section 3321 is referred to in section 1535 of this title.
§ 3322.  Vehicle turning left.
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute a hazard.
Cross References.  Section 3322 is referred to in sections
1535, 3301 of this title.
§ 3323.  Stop signs and yield signs.
    (a) Intersections controlled by signs.--Preferential right-ofway at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in section 6124 (relating to erection of traffic-control devices at intersections).
    (b) Duties at stop signs.--Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or appropriately attired persons authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if no stop line is present, before entering a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if no crosswalk is present, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a clear view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering. If, after stopping at a crosswalk or clearly marked stop line, a driver does not have a clear view of approaching traffic, the driver shall after yielding the right-ofway to any pedestrian in the crosswalk slowly pull forward from the stopped position to a point where the driver has a clear view of approaching traffic. The driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways and enter the intersection when it is safe to do so.
    (c) Duties at yield signs.--The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to the sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering. After slowing down or stopping, the driver shall yield the rightof-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection of roadways. If a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways after driving past a yield sign, the collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of failure of the driver to yield the right-of-way. (Dec. 21, 1998, P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days)
1998 Amendment.  Act 151 amended subsec. (b).
Cross References.  Section 3323 is referred to in sections
1535, 3112, 3114, 3326, 3327 of this title.
§ 3324.  Vehicle entering or crossing roadway.
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
    Cross References.  Section 3324 is referred to in section 1535 of this title.
§ 3325.  Duty of driver on approach of emergency vehicle.
    (a) General rule.--Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle making use of an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements and standards set forth in regulations adopted by the department, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in that position until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer or an appropriately attired person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic. On oneway roadways a driver may comply by driving to the edge or curb which is nearest to the lane in which he is traveling.
    (b) Duty of operator of streetcar.--Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle, the operator of every streetcar shall immediately stop the streetcar clear of any intersection and remain in that position until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer or an appropriately attired person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic.
    (c) Defense.--It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the defendant can show by a preponderance of the evidence that the failure to stop immediately for a police officer was based on a good faith concern for personal safety. In determining whether the defendant has met this burden, the court may consider the following factors:
     (1) The time and location of the event.
     (2) The type of vehicle used by the police officer.
     (3) The defendant's conduct while being followed by thepolice officer.
     (4) Whether the defendant stopped at the first availablereasonably lighted or populated area.
     (5) Any other factor considered relevant by the court.
(June 26, 2001, P.L.734, No.75, eff. 60 days)
Cross References.  Section 3325 is referred to in sections
3327, 3732, 3732.1 of this title.
§ 3326.  Duty of driver in construction and maintenance areas or on highway safety corridors.
    (a) Areas indicated by traffic-control devices.--The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any authorized vehicle or pedestrian actually engaged in work upon a highway within any highway or utility construction or maintenance area indicated by official traffic-control devices placed in accordance with department regulations, including advanced warning signs or a vehicle having flashing or revolving yellow lights.
    (b) Work vehicles displaying flashing lights.--The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any authorized vehicle obviously and actually engaged in work upon a highway whenever the vehicle displays flashing lights meeting the requirements and regulations promulgated by the department.
    (c) Fines to be doubled.--For any of the following violations, when committed in an active work zone manned by workers acting in their official capacity or on a highway safety corridor designated under section 6105.1 (relating to designation of highway safety corridors), the fine shall be double the usual amount:
     Section 3102 (relating to obedience to authorized persons directing traffic).
     Section 3111 (relating to obedience to traffic-control devices).
Section 3112 (relating to traffic-control signals).
Section 3114 (relating to flashing signals).
     Section 3302 (relating to meeting vehicle proceeding in opposite direction).
     Section 3303 (relating to overtaking vehicle on the left).
     Section 3304 (relating to overtaking vehicle on the right).
     Section 3305 (relating to limitations on overtaking on the left).
     Section 3306 (relating to limitations on driving on left side of roadway).
Section 3307 (relating to no-passing zones).
     Section 3309 (relating to driving on roadways laned for traffic).
Section 3310 (relating to following too closely).
Section 3323 (relating to stop signs and yield signs).
     Section 3326 (relating to duty of driver in construction and maintenance areas).
     Section 3361 (relating to driving vehicle at safe speed).
Section 3362 (relating to maximum speed limits).
Section 3702 (relating to limitations on backing).
Section 3714 (relating to careless driving).
Section 3736 (relating to reckless driving).
     Section 3802 (relating to driving under influence of alcohol or controlled substance).
(c.1)  Applicability of subsection (c).--Fines under subsection
  (c) shall be doubled only if the active work zone or highwaysafety corridor where the violation occurred is posted with an official sign in accordance with this section.
    (c.2) Penalties for bodily injury or death.--In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, a driver who violates this section and causes bodily injury to, serious bodily injury to or the death of a worker acting in the worker's official capacity or on a highway safety corridor designated under section 6105.1 commits an offense and shall, upon conviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an Accelerated Rehabilitative
Disposition program or a preadjudication program:
     (1) For causing bodily injury as defined in 18 Pa.C.S. §2301 (relating to definitions), pay a fine of not more than $1,000.
     (2) For causing serious bodily injury, pay a fine of notmore than $5,000.
     (3) For causing death, pay a fine of not more than$10,000.
    (c.3) Suspension of operating privilege.--Upon receiving a certified record of the driver's conviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an Accelerated Rehabilitative
Disposition program or a preadjudication program for a violation of this section, the department shall suspend the operating privilege of the driver in accordance with the following:
     (1) For a period of six months if the certifiedconviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an
Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition program or a preadjudication program indicates the violation resulted in the serious bodily injury of a worker acting in the worker's official capacity or on a highway safety corridor designated under section 6105.1.
     (2) For a period of one year if the certified conviction,adjudication of delinquency or admission into an Accelerated
Rehabilitative Disposition program or a preadjudication program indicates the violation resulted in the death of a worker acting in the worker's official capacity or on a highway safety corridor designated under section 6105.1.
  (d) Notice.--
     (1) Official traffic-control devices shall beappropriately placed to notify motorists that increased penalties apply for moving violations in active work zones signed in compliance with this subsection and subsection (e).
     (2) Official traffic control devices shall beappropriately placed to notify motorists that increased penalties apply for moving violations in highway safety corridors.
  (e) Posting.--Official traffic-control devices shall be erected at the beginning of an active work zone with a white strobe light or other unique, illuminated light or device. The light or device shall indicate that workers are present in the active work zone. The light or device shall be turned off if no workers are present. An official traffic-control device shall be erected immediately at the end of the active work zone indicating that workers are no longer present.
(July 5, 1989, P.L.164, No.30, eff. 60 days; July 6, 1995,
P.L.315, No.48, eff. 60 days; Dec. 23, 2002, P.L.1982, No.229, eff. 6 months; Sept. 30, 2003, P.L.120, No.24, eff. Feb. 1, 2004; Nov. 24, 2015, P.L.431, No.70, eff. 6 months)
2015 Amendment.  Act 70 added subsecs. (c.2) and (c.3).
2003 Amendment.  Act 24 amended subsec. (c).
    Cross References.  Section 3326 is referred to in section 1603 of this title. § 3327.  Duty of driver in emergency response areas and in relation to disabled vehicles.
    (a)  Emergency response areas.--When approaching or passing an emergency response area, a person, unless otherwise directed by an emergency service responder, shall:
     (1) pass in a lane not adjacent to that of the emergencyresponse area, if possible; or
     (2) if passing in a nonadjacent lane is impossible,illegal or unsafe, pass the emergency response area at a speed of no more than 20 miles per hour less than the posted speed limit and reasonable for safely passing the emergency response area.
    (a.1)  Disabled vehicles.--When approaching or passing a disabled vehicle, a person shall:
       (1) if it is possible to do so, pass in a lane notadjacent to that of the disabled vehicle; or
       (2) if it is impossible, illegal or unsafe to comply withparagraph (1), pass the disabled vehicle at a rate of speed that is no more than 20 miles per hour less than the posted speed limit and reasonable for safely passing the disabled vehicle. (b)  Penalty.--Any person violating subsection (a) or (a.1) commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, pay:
     (1) For a first offense, a fine of not more than $500.
     (2) For a second offense, a fine of not more than $1,000. (3)  For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of not more than $2,000.
(b.1)  Suspension of operating privilege.--
     (1)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2), in accordance with section 1540 (relating to surrender of license), the department shall suspend the operating privilege of any person for 90 days upon receiving a certified record of the driver's conviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition program or a preadjudication program for a violation of subsection (a) or (a.1), if the certified conviction:
     (i) indicates the violation resulted in serious bodilyinjury to or death of another person; or
     (ii) is the driver's third or subsequent convictionfor a violation of subsection (a) or (a.1).
     (2)  Upon receiving a certified record of the driver's conviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an
Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition program or a
preadjudication program for a violation of subsection (a) or (a.1), in accordance with section 1540, the department shall suspend the operating privilege of the driver in accordance with the following:
     (i) For a period of six months if the certifiedconviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition program or a preadjudication program indicates the violation resulted in the serious bodily injury of an emergency service responder or a person in or near a disabled vehicle.
     (ii) For a period of one year if the certifiedconviction, adjudication of delinquency or admission into an Accelerated Rehabilitative Disposition program or a preadjudication program indicates the violation resulted in the death of an emergency service responder or a person in or near a disabled vehicle.
    (b.2)  Penalties for bodily injury or death in emergency response areas.--In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, a driver who violates subsection (a) and causes bodily injury to, serious bodily injury to or the death of an emergency service responder or another person commits an offense and shall, upon conviction, as follows:
     (1) For causing bodily injury as defined in 18 Pa.C.S. §2301 (relating to definitions), pay a fine of not more than $1,000.
     (2) For causing serious bodily injury, pay a fine of notmore than $5,000.
     (3) For causing death, pay a fine of not more than
$10,000.
    (b.3)  Penalties for bodily injury or death in relation to disabled vehicles.--In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, a driver who violates subsection (a.1) and causes bodily injury to, serious bodily injury to or the death of another person commits an offense:
(1) For causing bodily injury as defined in 18 Pa.C.S. §
2301, pay a fine of not more than $1,000.
(2) For causing serious bodily injury as defined in 18
Pa.C.S. § 2301, pay a fine of not more than $5,000.
(3) For causing death, pay a fine of not more than
$10,000.
(c)  Marking.--
     (1) An emergency response area shall be clearly markedwith road flares, caution signs or any other traffic-control device which law enforcement officials may have at their immediate disposal or visual signals on vehicles meeting the requirements of Subchapter D of Chapter 45 (relating to equipment of authorized and emergency vehicles).
     (2) A disabled vehicle shall use at least two of thefollowing markings:
(i) Vehicular hazard signal lamps as provided insection 4305 (relating to vehicular hazard signal lamps).
(ii) Caution signs or other traffic-control device.
(iii) Road flares.
(d)  Reports by emergency service responders.--
     (1)  An emergency service responder observing a violation of subsection (a) or (a.1) may prepare a written, signed report which indicates that a violation has occurred. To the extent possible, the report shall include the following information:
     (i) Information pertaining to the identity of thealleged violator.
     (ii) The license number and color of the vehicleinvolved in the violation.
     (iii) The time and approximate location at which theviolation occurred.
     (iv) Identification of the vehicle as an automobile,station wagon, motor truck, motor bus, motorcycle or other type of vehicle.
     (2) Within 48 hours after the violation occurs, theemergency service responder shall deliver a copy of the report to a police officer having authority to exercise police power in the area where the violation occurred. If the police officer believes that the report established a sufficient basis for the issuance of a citation, the officer shall file a citation and a copy of the report with the issuing authority. If the issuing authority determines that the report and citation establish a sufficient basis for the issuance of a summons, a summons shall be issued in accordance with general rules governing the institution of proceedings in summary traffic offense cases. The issuing authority shall send the defendant a copy of the citation, together with a statement that it was filed by the police officer named in the citation on the basis of information received.
     (3) A person may institute a proceeding pursuant to thissubsection or in accordance with any means authorized by the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
    (e)  Fines to be doubled.--In addition to any penalty as provided in subsections (b), (b.2) and (b.3), the fine for any of the following violations when committed in an emergency response area manned by emergency service responders shall be double the usual amount:
     Section 3102 (relating to obedience to authorized persons directing traffic).
     Section 3111 (relating to obedience to traffic-control devices).
Section 3114 (relating to flashing signals).
     Section 3302 (relating to meeting vehicle proceeding in opposite direction).
Section 3303 (relating to overtaking vehicle on the left).
Section 3304 (relating to overtaking vehicle on the right).
     Section 3305 (relating to limitations on overtaking on the left).
     Section 3306 (relating to limitations on driving on left side of roadway).
Section 3307 (relating to no-passing zones).
Section 3310 (relating to following too closely).
     Section 3312 (relating to limited access highway entrances and exits).
Section 3323 (relating to stop signs and yield signs).
     Section 3325 (relating to duty of driver on approach of emergency vehicle).
Section 3361 (relating to driving vehicle at safe speed).
     Section 3707 (relating to driving or stopping close to fire apparatus).
     Section 3710 (relating to stopping at intersection or crossing to prevent obstruction).
Section 3714 (relating to careless driving).
Section 3736 (relating to reckless driving).
     Section 3802 (relating to driving under influence of alcohol or controlled substance).
    (e.1)  Public awareness.--The department shall educate the public of the provisions of this section periodically throughout the year and maintain information on the department's publicly accessible Internet website. The department shall refer to the education effort as the "Move Over" campaign.
    (f)  Definitions.--As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
    "Disabled vehicle."  A vehicle that is in a traffic lane or on the side of a traffic lane and is clearly marked with at least two of the markings specified in subsection (c)(2).
"Emergency response area."  Any of the following:
     (1) The area in which emergency service responders renderemergency assistance to individuals on or near a roadway or a police officer is conducting a traffic stop or systematic check of vehicles or controlling or directing traffic as long as the emergency vehicle is making use of visual signals meeting the requirements of Subchapter D of Chapter 45.
     (2) The area in which contractors or employees of a publicutility, a municipally owned utility or an electric cooperative provide disaster emergency-related services, including, but not limited to, the repair, renovation, installation, construction and activities related to damaged, impaired or destroyed infrastructure, within the first 72 hours after a declared emergency or until the expiration of a declared emergency, whichever is later, as long as the vehicles used to provide disaster emergency-related services are making use of visual signals as authorized under section 4572(b) (relating to visual signals on authorized vehicles).
(June 26, 2001, P.L.734, No.75, eff. 60 days; Sept. 30, 2003,
P.L.120, No.24, eff. Feb. 1, 2004; July 10, 2006, P.L.1086, No.113, eff. 60 days; Oct. 19, 2010, P.L.557, No.81, eff. 60 days;
Nov. 4, 2015, P.L.227, No.61, eff. 60 days; Nov. 24, 2015, P.L.431, No.70, eff. 6 months; July 7, 2017, P.L.301, No.20, eff.
60 days; Oct. 29, 2020, P.L.1057, No.105, eff. 180 days)
    2020 Amendment.  Section 2 of Act 105 provided that Act 105 may be referred to as the Move Over Law.
2017 Amendment.  Act 20 amended subsecs. (b) and (b.1)(1).
    2015 Amendments.  Act 61 amended subsec. (f) and Act 70 amended subsecs. (b.1) and (e) and added subsec. (b.2).
    2010 Amendment.  The preamble of Act 81 provided that Act 81 may be referred to as the Sgt. Michael C. Weigand Law.
Cross References.  Section 3327 is referred to in sections
1535, 3732, 3732.1 of this title.
§ 3328.  Unmarked police vehicles.
    (a) General rule.--The Pennsylvania State Police, in consultation with the department, shall promulgate regulations for the use of unmarked vehicles by police officers. The regulations shall:
     (1) establish the procedure to be used by a police officerin an unmarked vehicle when stopping a motorist;
     (2) require the use of audible and visual signals whichmeet the requirements and standards set forth in this title and
in regulations adopted by the department; and
     (3) establish requirements for the wearing of an officialpolice uniform and the display of official police identification.
    (b) Public awareness.--The Pennsylvania State Police and the department shall provide for the dissemination of information to the public regarding the use of unmarked vehicles. Such information shall accompany annual vehicle registration or vehicle registration renewal forms distributed by the department no earlier than July 1, 2002.
(June 26, 2001, P.L.734, No.75, eff. 60 days)
2001 Amendment.  Act 75 added section 3328.
§ 3329.  Duty of driver in litter enforcement corridors.
    (a) Areas indicated by traffic-control devices.--The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any authorized vehicle or pedestrian actually engaged in work upon a highway within a litter enforcement corridor indicated by official traffic-control devices placed in accordance with department regulations, including advanced warning signs or a vehicle having flashing or revolving yellow lights.
    (b) Fines to be doubled.--For any of the following violations, when committed in a litter enforcement corridor designated under section 6105.2 (relating to designation of litter enforcement corridors), the fine shall be double the usual amount:
     Section 3709 (relating to depositing waste and other material on highway, property or waters).
Section 4903 (relating to securing loads in vehicles).
18 Pa.C.S. § 6501 (relating to scattering rubbish).
    (c) Fines to be tripled.--If a person is found to be littering or scattering rubbish under 18 Pa.C.S. § 6501 that originated from a commercial business, the fine shall be triple the usual amount.
    (d) Notice.--Official traffic control devices shall be appropriately placed to notify motorists that increased penalties apply for littering violations within a litter enforcement corridor. (June 28, 2018, P.L.429, No.62, eff. 6 months)
2018 Amendment.  Act 62 added section 3329.
    Cross References.  Section 3329 is referred to in section 6109 of this title.
SUBCHAPTER C
TURNING, STARTING AND SIGNALS
Sec.
3331. Required position and method of turning.
3332. Limitations on turning around.
3333. Moving stopped or parked vehicle.
3334. Turning movements and required signals.
3335. Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps.
3336. Method of giving hand and arm signals.
§ 3331.  Required position and method of turning.
    (a) Right turn.--The driver of a vehicle intending to turn right shall approach the turn and make the turn as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
    (b) Left turn.--The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made to the left of the center of the intersection and so as to leave the intersection or location in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction as the vehicle on the roadway being entered.
    (c) Compliance with traffic-control devices.--The department and local authorities on highways under their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be placed and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by turning vehicles and when the devices are so placed no driver shall turn a vehicle other than as directed and required by the devices.
    (d) Two-way left turn lanes.--Where a special lane for making
left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official traffic-control devices:
     (1) A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
     (2) A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except whenpreparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.
    (e) Interference with pedalcycles.--No turn by a driver of a motor vehicle shall interfere with a pedalcycle proceeding straight while operating in accordance with Chapter 35 (relating to special vehicles and pedestrians). (Feb. 2, 2012, P.L.27, No.3, eff. 60 days)
2012 Amendment.  Act 3 added subsec. (e).
Cross References.  Section 3331 is referred to in sections
3301, 3505, 6109 of this title.
§ 3332.  Limitations on turning around.
    (a) General rule.--The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
    (b) Turns on curves or grades.--No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet.
    Cross References.  Section 3332 is referred to in section 1535 of this title.
§ 3333.  Moving stopped or parked vehicle.
    No person shall move a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until the movement can be made with safety.
§ 3334.  Turning movements and required signals.
    (a) General rule.--Upon a roadway no person shall turn a vehicle or move from one traffic lane to another or enter the traffic stream from a parked position unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety nor without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section.
    (b) Signals on turning and starting.--At speeds of less than 35 miles per hour, an appropriate signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. The signal shall be given during not less than the last 300 feet at speeds in excess of 35 miles per hour. The signal shall also be given prior to entry of the vehicle into the traffic stream from a parked position.
    (c) Limitations on use of certain signals.--The signals required on vehicles by section 3335(b) (relating to signals by hand and arm or signal lamps) shall not be flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with this section.
    (d) Discontinuing turn signals.--Turn signals shall be discontinued immediately after completing the turn or movement from one traffic lane to another traffic lane.
§ 3335.  Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps.
    (a)  General rule.--Any stop or turn signal shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b).
(b)  Required signals by signal lamps.--Any motor vehicle in
use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle and to any combination of vehicles.
    (c)  Exception.--This section does not apply to a motor vehicle registered as an antique or classic vehicle which was not originally equipped with signal lamps.
    Cross References.  Section 3335 is referred to in section 3334 of this title.
§ 3336.  Method of giving hand and arm signals.
    All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner except as indicated for pedalcycles and motorcycles and the signals shall indicate as follows:
     (1) For a left turn, the hand and arm shall be extendedhorizontally.
     (2) For a right turn, the left hand and arm shall beextended upward, except that operators of motorcycles and pedalcycles may also be permitted to signal a right turn by extending the right hand and arm horizontally.
     (3) To stop or decrease speed, the left hand and arm shallbe extended downward.
(Dec. 15, 1995, P.L.655, No.72, eff. 60 days)
SUBCHAPTER D
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
Sec.
3341. Obedience to signal indicating approach of train.
3342. Vehicles required to stop at railroad crossings.
3343. Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossings.
3344. Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
3345. Meeting or overtaking school bus.
3345.1. Automated enforcement of failure to stop for school bus with flashing red lights.
3346. Emergency vehicles entering or leaving official garage.
§ 3341.  Obedience to signal indicating approach of train.
    (a) General rule.--Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of the vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until it can be done safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply upon the occurrence of any of the following circumstances:
     (1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal devicegives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train.
     (2) A crossing gate is lowered or a flagman gives orcontinues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train.
     (3) A railroad train approaching within approximately1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from that distance and the railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is a hazard.
     (4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible andis in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
    (b) Compliance with crossing gate or barrier.--
     (1) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around orunder any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed.
     (2) No person shall start to drive a vehicle through,around or under a gate or barrier at the entrance to a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is being opened or closed.
    (c) Penalties.--A violation of subsection (a) constitutes a summary offense punishable by a fine of from $50 to $200. A violation of subsection (b) constitutes a summary offense punishable by a fine of from $200 to $500. (Dec. 21, 1998, P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days)
1998 Amendment.  Act 151 added subsec. (c).
Cross References.  Section 3341 is referred to in sections
1535, 1611, 3114 of this title.
§ 3342.  Vehicles required to stop at railroad crossings.
    (a) General rule.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the driver of any vehicle described in subsection (b), before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad crossing and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train. When it is safe to do so, the driver of the vehicle shall drive the vehicle across the tracks only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for manually changing gears while traversing the crossing. The driver shall not manually shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
    (b) Vehicles subject to stopping requirement.--Subsection (a) shall apply to the following vehicles:
     (1) Any vehicle designated by the department in accordancewith the provisions of subsection (d).
     (2) A school bus, whether or not carrying passengers.
     (3) Every truck and tractor combination which carriesgasoline, diesel fuel, fuel oil, explosives or radioactive materials.
     (4) Every bus transporting passengers.
     (5) Any vehicle specified in 49 CFR 392.10(a) (relating torailroad grade crossings; stopping required) or any current amendment or modification to that section published by the
United States Department of Transportation.
    (c) Exceptions.--Subsection (a) does not apply at any of the following:
     (1) Any railroad grade crossing at which traffic iscontrolled by a police officer or flagman, who indicates that the vehicle is not required to stop.
     (2) Any railroad grade crossing at which traffic isregulated by a functioning highway traffic-control signal transmitting a green indication for the direction of travel of the vehicle.
     (3) Any railroad grade crossing at which an officialtraffic-control device gives notice that the stopping requirement imposed by this section does not apply.
     (4) Any abandoned railroad grade crossing which is markedby the former rail operator with a sign prescribed by the department indicating that the rail line is abandoned.
     (5) An industrial or spur line railroad grade crossingmarked with a sign reading "exempt." Such a sign shall be erected only by or with the consent of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
    (d) Notice of vehicles subject to section.--The department shall publish in the Pennsylvania Bulletin a notice describing the vehicles which must comply with the stopping requirements of subsection (a). In developing the list of vehicles, the department shall give consideration to the hazardous nature of any substance carried by the vehicle as determined by the department and to the number of passengers carried by the vehicle in determining whether the vehicle shall be required to stop. This list of vehicles shall correlate with and so far as possible conform to the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation as amended from time to time.
    (e) Use of vehicle hazard lights.--The driver of any vehicle mentioned in subsection (b)(2) and (3) shall activate the vehicle hazard lights when stopping at the railroad crossing.
    (f) Penalty.--A violation of this section constitutes a summary offense punishable by a fine of from $100 to $150, except that a violation of subsection (b) or (e) shall be punishable by a fine of from $200 to $500.
    (g) Requirement upon approaching tracks.--Upon approaching any track of a railroad, the driver of every commercial motor vehicle as defined by section 1603 (relating to definitions) other than those listed in subsection (b) shall:
     (1) reduce the rate of speed of the commercial motorvehicle and check that the tracks are free of approaching
trains; and
     (2) stop the vehicle if the tracks are not clear.(h)  Railroad grade crossing.--No commercial motor vehicle may proceed onto a railroad grade crossing unless:
     (1) there is sufficient space to drive completely throughthe crossing without stopping; and
     (2) the vehicle has sufficient undercarriage clearance toallow the vehicle to drive completely through the railroad grade crossing without stopping.
    (i)  Traffic control.--No driver of a commercial motor vehicle may fail to obey a traffic control device or direction of an enforcement officer at a railroad grade crossing.
(July 9, 1986, P.L.544, No.96, eff. 60 days; Dec. 11, 1986,
P.L.1530, No.166, eff. 60 days; Dec. 10, 1996, P.L.925, No.149, eff. 60 days; Dec. 21, 1998, P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days; July 5, 2005, P.L.100, No.37; Oct. 24, 2012, P.L.1473, No.187, eff. 60 days)
2012 Amendment.  Act 187 amended subsec. (g) and added subsecs.
(h) and (i).
Cross References.  Section 3342 is referred to in sections
1535, 1611 of this title.
§ 3343.  Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossings.
    (a) General rule.--No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, power shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of ten or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent axles or in any event of less than nine inches measured above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section.
    (b) Notice of intended crossing.--Notice of any intended crossing shall be given to an authorized representative of the railroad and a reasonable time be given to the railroad to provide proper protection at the crossing.
    (c) Stopping at crossing.--Before making any crossing, the
person operating or moving the vehicle or equipment shall first stop the vehicle or equipment not less than 15 feet nor more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
    (d) Movement over crossing.--No crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal or crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or car. Movement over a crossing shall be under the direction of any flagman provided by the railroad.
    Cross References.  Section 3343 is referred to in section 1611 of this title.
§ 3344.  Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
    Unless otherwise directed by official traffic-control devices erected in accordance with provisions of Subchapter B of Chapter 31 (relating to traffic-control devices), the driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway within an urban district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, private road or driveway or, in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic.
    Cross References.  Section 3344 is referred to in section 1535 of this title.
§ 3345.  Meeting or overtaking school bus.
    (a)  Duty of approaching driver when red signals are flashing.--Except as provided in subsection (g), the driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking any school bus stopped on a highway or trafficway shall stop at least ten feet before reaching the school bus when the red signal lights on the school bus are flashing and the side stop signal arms are activated under section 4552(b.1) (relating to general requirements for school buses). The driver shall not proceed until the flashing red signal lights are no longer actuated. In no event shall a driver of a vehicle resume motion of the vehicle until the school children who may have alighted from the school bus have reached a place of safety. The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which a school bus is stopped shall stop his vehicle at that intersection until the flashing red signal lights are no longer actuated.
(a.1)  Reports by school bus operators.--
     (1)  The operator of a school bus who observes a violation of subsection (a) may prepare a signed, written report which indicates that a violation has occurred. To the extent possible, the report shall include the following information:
     (i) Information, if any, pertaining to the identity ofthe alleged violator.
     (ii) The license number and color of the vehicleinvolved in the violation.
     (iii) The time and approximate location at which theviolation occurred.
     (iv) Identification of the vehicle as an automobile,station wagon, motor truck, motor bus, motorcycle or other type of vehicle.
     (v) Whether the school bus is equipped with a sidestop signal arm enforcement system under section 3345.1 (relating to automated enforcement of failure to stop for school bus with flashing red lights).
     (2) Within 48 hours after the violation occurs, the schoolbus operator shall deliver a copy of the report to a police officer having authority to exercise police power in the area where the violation occurred. If the police officer believes that the report establishes a sufficient basis for the issuance of a citation, the officer shall file a citation and the report with the issuing authority. If the issuing authority determines that the report and citation establish a sufficient basis for the issuance of a summons, a summons shall be issued in accordance with general rules governing the institution of proceedings in summary traffic offense cases. The issuing authority shall send the defendant a copy of the citation, together with a statement that it was filed by the police officer named in the citation on the basis of information received.
     (3) A person may institute a proceeding pursuant to thissubsection or in accordance with any means authorized by the
Rules of Criminal Procedure.
    (b) Duty of approaching driver when amber signals areflashing.--The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking any school bus shall proceed past the school bus with caution and shall be prepared to stop when the amber signal lights are flashing.
    (c) Use of red signals.--The red visual signals shall be actuated by the driver of every school bus whenever the vehicle is stopped on a highway or trafficway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, except as provided in subsections (e) and (f). The signals shall not be terminated until the school children who may have alighted from the school bus have reached a place of safety or until boarding school children have completed boarding the bus.
    (d) Use of amber signals.--The amber visual signals shall be actuated by the driver of every school bus not more than 300 feet nor less than 150 feet prior to making a stop for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children and shall remain in operation until the red visual signals are actuated. Amber signals shall not be used unless the red visual signals are to be actuated immediately following.
    (e) Limitations on use of signals.--The visual signals required in the regulations shall not be actuated on streets in urban districts designated by the department or local authorities, at intersections or other places where traffic is controlled by uniformed police officers or appropriately attired persons authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, or in school bus loading areas designated by the department or local authorities when the bus is entirely off the roadway.
    (f) Operation for nonschool purposes.--When a school bus is being operated upon a highway for purposes other than the actual transportation of school children to or from school or in connection with school activities, all markings indicating "SCHOOL BUS" shall be covered or concealed. During such operation, the flashing visual signals shall not be actuated.
    (f.1)  Use of school buses for transportation of disabled persons.--Whenever a school bus is being used upon a highway or trafficway for the transportation of disabled persons exclusively and the school bus is equipped with red signal lights, the driver of the school bus may actuate the signal lights in the same manner as set forth in this section regarding the transportation of school children. The driver of a vehicle approaching the school bus shall have the same duties regarding stopping, passing and overtaking as he does with respect to a school bus carrying school children.
    (g) Exceptions from stopping requirements.--The driver of a vehicle upon a highway or trafficway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus with actuated red signal lights which is on a different roadway.
    (h) Loading zones for school children.--Every school district transporting school children by school bus shall establish and maintain school bus loading zones at or near all schools to or from which school children are transported and shall establish school bus loading zones along the highways and trafficways traversed by school buses in accordance with regulations promulgated by the department.
    (i) Mandatory use of loading zones.--Whenever school bus loading zones have been established at or near a school or along a highway or trafficway, it is unlawful for a school bus operator to stop the bus to pick up or discharge school children at any location other than at the loading zones. A list of approved loading zones for the route of the bus shall be carried by the operator.
    (j) Penalty.--A person who violates subsection (a) or (f.1) commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $250 and a $35 surcharge. The surcharge shall be deposited into the School Bus Safety Grant Program Account. (Mar. 29, 1984, P.L.155, No.30, eff. 60 days; Dec. 19, 1988, P.L.1290, No.163, eff. imd.; Dec. 21, 1998, P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days; Oct. 4, 2002, P.L.845, No.123, eff. 60 days; Oct. 24,
2018, P.L.1154, No.159, eff. 6 months; Oct. 23, 2023, P.L.134,
No.19, eff. 60 days)
2023 Amendment.  Act 19 amended subsec. (a.1)(1)(v).
2018 Amendment.  Act 159 amended subsecs. (a.1)(1) and (j).
    1998 Amendment.  Act 151 amended subsecs. (a), (c), (f.1), (g), (h) and (i).
1984 Amendment.  Act 30 amended subsec. (j) and added subsecs.
(a.1) and (f.1).
Cross References.  Section 3345 is referred to in sections
1535, 1553, 3101, 3345.1, 4552, 4553, 6506 of this title.
§ 3345.1.  Automated enforcement of failure to stop for school bus with flashing red lights.
    (a)  General rule.--A school entity may install and operate a side stop signal arm enforcement system for the purpose of enforcing this section.
(a.1)  Violation and liability.--
     (1) A motor vehicle meeting or overtaking a school busstopped on a highway or trafficway when the red signal lights on the school bus are flashing and the side stop signal arms are activated as described in section 3345 (relating to meeting or overtaking school bus) is a violation of this section.
     (2) The owner of a motor vehicle that violates paragraph
(1) shall be liable for the penalty imposed under subsection (c), unless the owner is convicted of a violation of section
3345 or has a defense under subsection (f). For the purposes of
this section, the lessee of a leased vehicle shall be considered the owner of a motor vehicle. (b)  Applicability.-(1)  (Deleted by amendment).
     (2)  Nothing in this section shall supersede the provisions of:
     (i) Section 3105(h) (relating to drivers of emergencyvehicles).
     (ii) Section 3345(c) or (d).
    (c)  Penalty.--For each violation of this section, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be subject to a penalty as follows:
(1)  The penalty for the violation shall be a fine of $300.
The fine shall be distributed as follows:
     (i) $250 to the school entity where the violationoccurred and which authorized the use of a side stop signal arm enforcement system, which shall be utilized for the installation, administration or maintenance of side stop signal arm enforcement systems, including through a system administrator under an agreement with the school entity, on school buses;
     (ii) $25 to the primary police department thatreviewed the submitted evidence as required under
subsection (h.2); and
     (iii) $25 to the School Bus Safety Grant ProgramAccount.
(1.1)  The fine under paragraph (1) shall not be subject to
42 Pa.C.S. § 3571 (relating to Commonwealth portion of fines, etc.) or 3573 (relating to municipal corporation portion of fines, etc.).
(2) (Deleted by amendment).
(3) (Deleted by amendment).
(4) A violation under this section shall not: (i)  be deemed a criminal conviction;
(ii)  be made part of the operating record of the individual upon whom the penalty is imposed under section
1535 (relating to schedule of convictions and points);
     (iii) be the subject of merit rating for insurancepurposes; or
     (iv) authorize imposition of surcharge points in theprovision of motor vehicle insurance coverage.
    (d) Certificate as evidence.--A certificate, or a facsimile of a certificate, based upon inspection of recorded images produced by a side stop signal arm enforcement system and sworn to or affirmed by a primary police department shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it. The school entity, the system administrator on the school entity's behalf or the contracted company that provides pupil transportation must include written documentation that the side stop signal arm enforcement system was operating correctly at the time of the alleged violation. A recorded image evidencing a violation of this section shall be admissible in any judicial or administrative proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the violation of this section.
    (e) Limitations.--
(1)  (i)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, equipment deployed as part of a side stop signal arm enforcement system as provided under this section must be incapable of automated or user-controlled remote surveillance by means of recorded video images.
     (ii) Recorded images collected as part of the sidestop signal arm enforcement system may only record violations of this section and may not be used for any other surveillance purposes.
     (iii) Restrictions under this paragraph shall not bedeemed to preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials if the information is reasonably described and is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action.
(1.1)  (i)  To the extent practical, an automated side stop signal arm enforcement system shall use necessary technologies to ensure that photographs or recorded video images produced by the system shall not identify, nor be configured to identify, the driver, the passengers or the interior contents of the motor vehicle.
     (ii)  No violation of this section may be dismissed solely because a photograph or recorded video image allows for the identification of the driver, passengers or interior contents of the motor vehicle as long as a reasonable effort has been made to comply with this paragraph.
(2)  (i)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, information prepared under this section and information relating to violations of this section which are kept by the school entity, system administrator on the school entity's behalf, contracted company that provides pupil transportation or primary police department, its authorized agents or employees, including recorded images, written records, reports or facsimiles, names, addresses, vehicle information and the number of violations under this section, shall be exclusively used for the purpose of enforcing this section through side stop signal arm enforcement systems.
     (ii) The information shall not be deemed a publicrecord under the act of February 14, 2008 (P.L.6, No.3), known as the Right-to-Know Law.
     (iii) The information may be discoverable by courtorder or otherwise and may be offered in evidence in any action or proceeding which is directly related to a violation of this section or any other violation in connection with a criminal law enforcement action.
     (3) Images obtained through the use of a side stop signalarm enforcement system shall be destroyed within one year of final disposition of the recorded event. A system administrator under an agreement with a school entity shall notify the school entity by written notice in accordance with this section that the records have been destroyed.
     (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, motorvehicle owner information obtained as a result of the operation of a side stop signal arm enforcement system shall not be the property of the school entity, system administrator on the school entity's behalf or contracted company that provides pupil transportation and may not be used for any purpose other than prescribed in this section.
     (5) A violation of this subsection shall constitute amisdemeanor of the third degree punishable by a $500 fine. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
     (6) A school entity, system administrator or contractedcompany that provides pupil transportation that violates this subsection in which the penalty is a misdemeanor shall be subject to 18 Pa.C.S. § 307 (relating to liability of organizations and certain related persons). (f)  Defenses.-(1)  (Deleted by amendment).
     (2) (Deleted by amendment).
     (3) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the owner of the motor vehicle named in the notice of the violation was not driving the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. The owner may be required to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the time of the alleged violation. The owner may not be required to disclose the identity of the driver of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation.
     (4) It shall be a defense to a violation under this
section that the motor vehicle in the notice of the violation has been reported to any police department as stolen prior to the time the violation occurred and had not been recovered prior to that time.
     (5) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person receiving the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the offense.
     (6) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the side stop signal arm enforcement system being used under this section was not in compliance with the department's regulations with respect to testing for accuracy, certification or calibration.
(g)  Agreements.--
     (1) A school entity may enter into an agreement with asystem administrator to initiate actions to enforce this section through a side stop signal arm enforcement system.
     (2) Except as otherwise provided, an agreement underparagraph (1) shall take effect in a school entity by vote of the local board of school directors. The meeting to consider approval of a side stop signal arm enforcement system shall be properly noticed under 65 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings).
     (3) Enforcement of this section shall only occur in thosejurisdictions where the school entity has a written intergovernmental agreement with a primary police department for that jurisdiction.
     (4) Compensation under an agreement authorized by thissection shall not require a minimum or maximum number of violations to be issued that would impact the compensation to the system administrator.
     (5) The school entity, or the system administrator on theschool entity's behalf, shall provide notice through a publicly accessible Internet website that provides guidance and information related to the system, including, but not limited to, the number of school buses equipped with a system, the appeals process limited to the defenses under subsection (f) and contact information. The website shall remain publicly accessible throughout the period of use in a manner as determined by the school entity.
     (6) The school entity, or the system administrator on theschool entity's behalf, shall establish an electronic system where program information and all violations, in conformance with this section, can be accessed and viewed by:
     (i) The primary police department for conductingprocedures under subsection (h.2).
     (ii) The department's hearing officer for conductingprocedures under subsection (i.4).
     (7) The school entity, or the system administrator on theschool entity's behalf, may utilize an alternative system to share program information and all violations if the electronic system is unavailable for any legitimate purpose.
     (8) The department may randomly conduct audits of a schoolentity, or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf, to ensure compliance with this section as determined by the department. If the department conducts an audit, the department shall prepare a summary of the audit, which shall be posted on the publicly accessible Internet website maintained by the school entity or the system administrator on the school entity's behalf.
    (h)  Submission of violation information.--A school entity, or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf, shall submit the following information regarding a violation of this section to the primary police department using the electronic system under subsection (g)(6):
     (1) A copy of the recorded image showing the motorvehicle.
     (2) The license plate number and state of issuance of themotor vehicle.
     (3) The date, time and place of the alleged violation.
     (4) Not later than July 1 annually, the school entity, orthe system administrator on the school entity's behalf, shall submit a report to the department and the Pennsylvania State Police for the preceding calendar year. The information shall be compiled by the department and the Pennsylvania State Police into a report to be jointly submitted to the chairperson and minority chairperson of the Transportation Committee of the Senate and the chairperson and minority chairperson of the
Transportation Committee of the House of Representatives by no later than December 31 annually. The report shall be posted on the publicly accessible Internet website maintained by the school entity or the system administrator on the school entity's behalf. The report shall be a public record under the Right-to-Know Law and include:
     (i) The name of the system administrator.
     (ii) The number of school buses equipped with a sidestop signal arm enforcement system.
     (iii) The number of notices of violation issued.
     (iv) The amount of fines imposed and collected.
     (v) The amounts paid under agreements authorized bythis section.
     (vi) The results of contested violations.
     (vii) Use of additional revenue funds and any grantsawarded from the program.
(h.1)  Duty of school district.--(Deleted by amendment).
    (h.2)  Police review required.--Upon receipt of violation information under subsection (h), a primary police department shall:
     (1) Review submitted evidence to determine if a violationunder this section occurred and electronically certify the notice of violation.
     (2) Notify the school entity, or the system administratoron the school entity's behalf, of the electronic certification of the notice of violation related to the primary police department's capacity to view and authorize the notice.
     (3) Restrict the review of submitted evidence underparagraph (1) to an individual who is a police officer.
(i)  (Reserved).
    (i.1)  Notice of violation, fines and contest.--(Deleted by amendment).
(i.2)  Notice of violation.--
     (1) Upon certification from a primary police departmentthat a violation of this section has occurred as required by subsection (h.2), a school entity, or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf, shall initiate an action to enforce this section by sending an administrative notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle identified by a side stop signal arm enforcement system as violating this section.
     (2) The notice of violation shall include all of thefollowing:
     (i) A copy of the recorded image showing the motorvehicle.
     (ii) The registration number and state of issuance ofthe motor vehicle registration.
     (iii) The date, time and place of the alleged
violation.
     (iv) Certification of the alleged violation from theprimary police department and written documentation that the side stop signal arm enforcement system was operating correctly at the time of the alleged violation as required under subsection (d).
     (v) Notice that the owner of the motor vehicle ischarged with a violation of this section.
     (vi) Instructions for return of the notice ofviolation and payment of the fine under subsection (i.3).
     (vii) Instructions for contesting the violation undersubsection (i.4).
     (viii) A statement that a violation under thissection:
     (A) is not deemed a criminal conviction;
     (B) will not be made part of the operating recordof the individual upon whom the violation of this
section is being imposed;
     (C) will not be used to determine a merit ratingfor insurance purposes; and
     (D) does not authorize the imposition of surchargepoints in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage.
     (3)  A notice of violation shall be sent by first class mail as follows:
     (i) In the case of a violation involving a motorvehicle subject to the laws of this Commonwealth, the notice of violation must be mailed within 30 days after the commission of the violation or within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the owner, whichever is later, and not thereafter to the address of the owner listed in the records of the department.
     (ii) In the case of motor vehicles from jurisdictionsother than this Commonwealth, the notice of violation must be mailed within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the owner and not thereafter to the address of the owner as listed in the records of the official in the jurisdiction having charge of the registration of the motor vehicle.
     (iii) A notice of violation under this section shallbe invalid unless provided to the owner within 90 days of the commission of the violation.
     (iv) A manual or automatic record of mailing preparedby a school entity, or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf, in the ordinary course of business shall be prima facie evidence of mailing and shall be admissible in a judicial or administrative proceeding as to the facts contained in the notice of violation.
    (i.3)  Payment of fine.--Payment of the fine shall be as follows:
     (1) An owner of the motor vehicle may admit responsibilityfor the violation and pay the fine provided in the notice of
violation personally, through an authorized agent, electronically or by mailing both the payment and notice of violation to the school entity or to a system administrator on the school entity's behalf.
     (2) Payment of the fine shall operate as a finaldisposition of the violation of this section.
     (3) If payment is not received within 90 days of themailing date of the notice of violation, the school entity, or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf, may request an applicable credit collection agency to resolve the payment amount owed. (i.4)  Contest of violation.--The procedure for contesting a violation of this section shall be as follows:
     (1) An owner of the motor vehicle may, within 30 days ofthe mailing date of the notice of violation, request a hearing before the department's hearing officer to contest liability either personally, by an authorized agent or by mailing a request in writing on the prescribed form or electronically. A hearing to contest liability may be in person or be conducted through live-stream synchronous video conferencing or similar virtual presence technology and shall be only at reasonable locations and times set by the school entity or the system administrator on the school entity's behalf.
     (2) Upon receipt of a hearing request, the school entity,or the system administrator on the school entity's behalf, shall in a timely manner schedule the matter before a hearing officer designated by the department. Written notice of the date, time and place of hearing shall be sent by first class mail or electronically to the owner of the motor vehicle.
     (3) The hearing shall be informal and the rules ofevidence shall not apply. The decision of the department's hearing officer shall be made within 45 days from the hearing date and shall be final, subject to the right of the owner of the motor vehicle to appeal the decision under paragraph (4).
     (3.1)  The school entity, in coordination with the system administrator, if applicable, may enter into an agreement to designate a person to represent the school entity, or the system administrator on the school entity's behalf, to administer the hearing to contest liability under this subsection.
     (4) If, within 45 days of issuance of the decision of thedepartment's hearing officer, the owner of the motor vehicle requests in writing an appeal of the decision of the department's hearing officer, the owner shall file the notice of violation and supporting documents with the office of the magisterial district judge for the magisterial district where the violation occurred. A magisterial district judge shall hear and decide the matter de novo and shall be restricted to finding an owner liable or not liable for violating this section and shall not assign damages to an owner or otherwise impose penalties on primary police departments, police officers, school entities, system administrators or other persons involved in the appeal process, except as otherwise provided under 42 Pa.C.S. § 1726 (relating to establishment of taxable costs), which may only be assessed to the school entity or system administrator on the school entity's behalf.
     (5) The school entity, or system administrator on theschool entity's behalf, shall reimburse the department for the actual cost of the hearing officer designated under paragraph
(2). (j)  Department approval.--
     (1) No side stop signal arm enforcement system may be usedwithout the approval of the department, which shall have the authority to promulgate regulations for the certification and use of such systems.
     (2) Any system installed prior to the effective date ofthis paragraph shall obtain department approval within six months of the effective date of the temporary regulations promulgated under paragraph (3).
     (3) In order to facilitate the prompt implementation ofthis section, regulations promulgated by the department under this section during the three years following the effective date of this section shall be deemed temporary regulations, which shall expire upon the prompt promulgation of final regulations. The temporary regulations shall not be subject to:
     (i) Sections 201, 202, 203, 204 and 205 of the act of
July 31, 1968 (P.L.769, No.240), referred to as the Commonwealth Documents Law.
     (ii) The act of June 25, 1982 (P.L.633, No.181), knownas the Regulatory Review Act.
     (iii) Section 204(b) of the act of October 15, 1980 (P.L.950, No.164), known as the Commonwealth Attorneys Act.
(k) School Bus Safety Grant Program.--
     (1) The School Bus Safety Grant Program Account isestablished as a restricted account in the General Fund. Money in the account is appropriated on a continuing basis to the department for grants under this subsection.
     (2) The surcharge established under section 3345(j), theportion of the fine established under subsection (c)(1)(iii) and any other revenue as provided for under this title shall be deposited into the account and shall be used by the department to implement the School Bus Safety Grant Program. The department shall develop a uniform application process to award school bus safety grants in an amount not to exceed $100,000 on a competitive basis for the following purposes:
     (i) To promote and increase school bus safety,education and training throughout this Commonwealth.
     (ii) To reimburse or pay for, in whole or in part,education, training and other associated costs related to the issuance of a commercial learner's permit, commercial driver's license or school bus endorsement by the department to an individual for the purpose of driving a school bus in this Commonwealth.
     (3) The department may pay any actual administrative costsarising from the administration of this section out of the fines deposited into the account.
     (4) The following are eligible to apply for grants underthis subsection:
     (i) Independent school bus contractors.
     (ii) School entities.
     (iii) Municipalities.
     (5) The department shall post information related to thisgrant program on the department's publicly accessible Internet website.
(l) Contracted companies.--
     (1) No contracted company that provides pupiltransportation shall be liable if a side stop signal arm enforcement system is vandalized or otherwise malfunctions.
     (2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to requirea contracted company that provides pupil transportation to take a school bus out of service due to a nonfunctioning side stop signal arm enforcement system, except that a contracted company shall allow the school entity, or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf, access to the school bus for the purpose of repairing and maintaining a side stop signal arm enforcement system when the school bus is not in service at a time mutually agreeable to the contractor and school entity or a system administrator on the school entity's behalf.
     (3) Independent school bus contractors shall not be heldresponsible for costs associated with the side stop signal arm enforcement system, including, but not limited to, installation, maintenance, repair, replacement or removal of the system.
(m) Definitions.--As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
    "Local board of school directors."  A board of directors or other governing authority of a school entity.
"Manufacturer" or "vendor."  (Deleted by amendment). "Primary police department."  Any of the following:
     (1) The police department of the municipality in which aschool entity is located if the municipality has a police department with authority to issue citations for violations of this title.
     (2) The Pennsylvania State Police if the municipality inwhich a school entity is located does not have a police department with authority to issue citations for violations of this title, at the sole discretion of the Pennsylvania State Police.
     (3) A police department of the school entity.
    "Pupil transportation."  The transport of resident pupils of a school district to and from preprimary, primary or secondary schools and students to or from public, private or parochial schools. The term does not include transportation for field trips.
    "School entity."  A school district, area career and technical school, intermediate unit, charter school, regional charter school or cyber charter school.
    "Side stop signal arm enforcement system" or "system."  A camera system installed on a school bus with at least one camera and one computer that produce recorded video and two or more photographic still images of a motor vehicle being used or operated in a manner that violates this section.
    "Side stop signal arms."  As described in section 4552(b.1) (relating to general requirements for school buses).
    "System administrator."  A person that creates, owns or has a license or permission to sell, lease, distribute or administer a side stop signal arm enforcement system that, consistent with the requirements of this section, is under agreement with a school entity to perform, but not be limited to, the following:
     (1) Provide for the installation, operation andmaintenance of a side stop signal arm enforcement system on one or more school buses within a school entity's fleet, regardless of whether a school bus is owned, contracted or leased by the school entity.
     (2) Administer the enforcement of a violation of thissection through a side stop signal arm enforcement system on a school entity's behalf as permitted by this section, including maintaining and transmitting records, mailing violation notices, processing violations, collecting fines and administering contests of violations, unless a school entity designates another person to contest the violations.
(Oct. 24, 2018, P.L.1154, No.159; July 1, 2020, P.L.515, No.38, eff. 60 days; Oct. 20, 2021, P.L.423, No.80, eff. imd.; Oct. 23, 2023, P.L.134, No.19; Dec. 14, 2023, P.L.344, No.38, eff. imd.)
    2023 Amendments.  Act 19 amended the entire section, effective immediately as to subsec. (j)(3) and 60 days as to the remainder of the section, and Act 38 amended subsecs. (e)(4), (f)(3), (i.2)
(1), (2)(v) and (3)(i), (ii) and (iii), (i.3)(3) and (i.4)(4). 2018 Amendment.  Section 3 of Act 159 provided that the addition of subsec. (j) shall take effect immediately and six months as to the rest of the section.
    References in Text.  Section 27 of Act 16 of 2019 provided that a reference in statute or regulation to "area vocational-technical school" shall be deemed a reference to "area career and technical school," and a reference in statute or regulation to "vocational curriculums" shall be deemed a reference to "career and technical
curriculums."
Cross References.  Section 3345.1 is referred to in section
3345 of this title.
§ 3346.  Emergency vehicles entering or leaving official garage.
    If an emergency vehicle is leaving or returning to its garage and the emergency lights of the emergency vehicle are engaged, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall stop and give the emergency vehicle the right-of-way to leave or enter the garage and may not proceed until the emergency vehicle is safely out of the driver's path. (Dec. 21, 1998, P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days) 1998 Amendment.  Act 151 added section 3346.
SUBCHAPTER E
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sec.
3351. Stopping, standing and parking outside business andresidence districts.
3352. Removal of vehicle by or at direction of police.
3353. Prohibitions in specified places.
3354. Additional parking regulations.
3355. Removal of vehicles in a city of the first class.
Cross References.  Subchapter E is referred to in sections
3509, 3745.1 of this title.
§ 3351.  Stopping, standing and parking outside business and residence districts.
    (a) General rule.--Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or stand any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or stand the vehicle off the roadway. In the event it is necessary to stop, park or stand the vehicle on the roadway or any part of the roadway, an unobstructed width of the highway opposite the vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and the vehicle shall be visible from a distance of 500 feet in each direction upon the highway.
    (b) Exception for disabled vehicles.--This section and sections 3353 (relating to prohibitions in specified places) and 3354 (relating to additional parking regulations) do not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in that position.
Cross References.  Section 3351 is referred to in sections
3352, 4572, 6109 of this title.
§ 3352.  Removal of vehicle by or at direction of police.
    (a) Outside business and residence districts.--Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of section 3351 (relating to stopping, standing and parking outside business and residence districts), the officer may move the vehicle, or cause the vehicle to be moved, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle, to a position off the roadway where the vehicle will not interfere unduly with the normal movement of traffic or constitute a safety hazard.
    (b) Unattended vehicle obstructing traffic.--Any police
officer may remove or cause to be removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in any tunnel, in such position or under such circumstances as to interfere unduly with the normal movement of traffic or constitute a safety hazard.
    (c) Removal to garage or place of safety.--Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed to the place of business of the operator of a wrecker or to a nearby garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway under any of the following circumstances:
     (1) Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolenor taken without the consent of its owner.
     (2) The person or persons in charge of the vehicle arephysically unable to provide for the custody or removal of the vehicle.
     (3) The person driving or in control of the vehicle isarrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before an issuing authority without unnecessary delay.
     (4) The vehicle is in violation of section 3353 (relatingto prohibitions in specified places) except for overtime parking.
     (5) The vehicle has been abandoned as defined in thistitle. The officer shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
73 (relating to abandoned vehicles and cargos).
    (d) Notice to owner prior to removal.--
     (1) Prior to removal of an abandoned vehicle bearing aregistration plate, current certificate of inspection or vehicle identification number plate by which the last registered owner of the vehicle can be determined, the police department shall send a notice by certified mail to the last registered owner of the vehicle informing the owner that unless the vehicle is moved to a suitable location within seven days of the date notice is mailed, the vehicle will be removed under this section and held at a suitable facility where it may be reclaimed by the owner in accordance with the provisions of section 7306 (relating to payment of costs upon reclaiming vehicle). If the abandoned motor vehicle does not bear an identifiable registration plate, current certificate of inspection or vehicle identification number plate, the notice may be secured to the vehicle.
     (2) If, within the seven-day period, the owner sorequests, the owner shall be given an opportunity to explain to the police officer or department why the owner believes the vehicle should not be removed. If the police officer or department determines that the vehicle shall, nonetheless, be removed, the owner shall be given an additional 48 hours to remove the vehicle, have it removed or demand a hearing, which shall conform to the requirements of 2 Pa.C.S. Ch. 5 Subch. B (relating to practice and procedure of local agencies). The police officer or department shall inform the owner of the right to a hearing by delivering to the owner a notice warning the owner that, unless the vehicle is removed or a hearing is demanded, the owner shall be subject to the provisions of section 7306. If, as a result of the hearing, it is determined that the vehicle will be removed, the owner shall be given an additional 48 hours to remove the vehicle or have it removed. The hearing shall be before a civilian officer or employee of the municipality in which the vehicle is located.
     (3) The provision for notice set forth in this subsectionis applicable only if the vehicle is abandoned upon a highway and is not in violation of subsection (b) or section 3351(a) or 3353. Notice under this subsection is in addition to any other notice requirements provided in Chapter 73.
     (4) This subsection does not apply to nonrepairablevehicles.
(Apr. 3, 1984, P.L.181, No.33, eff. 60 days; Dec. 9, 2002,
P.L.1278, No.152, eff. 60 days)
2002 Amendment.  Act 152 amended subsecs. (c) and (d).
§ 3353.  Prohibitions in specified places.
    (a) General rule.--Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
     (1) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
     (i) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped orparked at the edge or curb of a street except that:
       (A) A pedalcycle may be parked as provided insection 3509(b)(2) (relating to parking).
       (B) Standing or parking for the purpose of loadingor unloading persons or property may be authorized by local ordinance, but the ordinance shall not authorize standing or parking on State designated highways except during off-peak traffic-flow hours as determined by department regulations. (ii)  On a sidewalk except that a pedalcycle may be parked as provided in section 3509(b)(2).
     (iii) Within an intersection.
     (iv) On a crosswalk.
     (v) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
     (vi) Alongside or opposite any street excavation orobstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
     (vii) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upona highway or within a highway tunnel.
     (viii) On any railroad tracks.
     (ix) In the area between roadways of a dividedhighway, including crossovers.
     (x) At any place where official signs prohibitstopping. (2)  Stand or park a vehicle: (i)  In front of a public or private driveway.
     (ii) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
     (iii) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at anintersection.
     (iv) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashingsignal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the site of a roadway.
     (v) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to anyfire station or, when properly sign posted, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance.
     (vi) Where the vehicle would prevent the free movementof a streetcar.
     (vii) On a limited access highway unless authorized byofficial traffic-control devices.
     (viii) At any place where official signs prohibitstanding.
     (ix) Within 30 feet upon the approach to a sign
warning of the possible presence of a person with a disability in the vicinity of a roadway adjacent to the person's residence or the possible presence of a person with a disability frequently traversing the roadway at that location. This subparagraph shall not apply unless an enabling local ordinance has been passed. The ordinance may apply generally throughout the municipality or be site specific. The ordinance may specify the height of vehicles prohibited from parking in these locations. The enforcement of this subparagraph requires that a sign indicating the violation and amount of fine be posted at each applicable location. For purposes of this section, the term "disability" shall mean a hearing impairment or total or partial blindness. (3)  Park a vehicle:
     (i) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroadcrossing.
     (ii) At any place where official signs prohibitparking.
    (b) Unattended vehicle on private property.--
     (1) No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle onprivate property without the consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of the property except in the case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for the removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.
     (2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply toprivate parking lots unless such lots are posted to notify the public of any parking restrictions and the operator of the vehicle violates such posted restrictions. For the purposes of this section "private parking lot" means a parking lot open to the public or used for parking without charge; or a parking lot used for parking with charge. The department shall define by regulation what constitutes adequate posting for public notice.
    (c) Property owner may remove vehicle.--The owner or other person in charge or possession of any property on which a vehicle is parked or left unattended in violation of the provisions of subsection (b) may remove or have removed the vehicle at the reasonable expense of the owner of the vehicle. Such person who removes or has removed a vehicle left parked or unattended in violation of the provisions of subsection (b) shall have a lien against the owner of the vehicle, in the amount of the reasonable value of the costs of removing the vehicle plus the costs of storage. Any city, borough, incorporated town or township may, by ordinance, provide for rates to be charged for removal of vehicles and for municipal regulation of authorized towing services. If storage charges are not set by the municipality, a maximum of $25 per day may be charged for storage.
    (d) Restrictions by appropriate authorities.--The department on State-designated highways and local authorities on any highway within their boundaries may by erection of official trafficcontrol devices prohibit, limit or restrict stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where engineering and traffic studies indicate that stopping, standing or parking would constitute a safety hazard or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic.
    (e) Penalty.--Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50. (Nov. 9, 1977, P.L.226, No.69, eff. imd.; Nov. 10, 1979, P.L.460, No.95, eff. imd.; Oct. 10, 1980, P.L.791, No.147, eff. imd.; Dec. 9, 2002, P.L.1278, No.152, eff. 60 days; July 2, 2004, P.L.497,
No.58, eff. imd.)
2004 Amendment.  Act 58 amended subsecs. (a)(2) and (e).
2002 Amendment.  Act 152 amended subsec. (c).
1980 Amendment.  Act 147 amended subsec. (b).
1979 Amendment.  Act 95 amended subsecs. (a)(1)(i) and (c). Cross References.  Section 3353 is referred to in sections
3351, 3352, 4572, 6109 of this title.
§ 3354.  Additional parking regulations.
    (a) Two-way highways.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle standing or parked upon a two-way highway shall be positioned parallel to and with the right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
    (b) One-way highways.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle standing or parked upon a one-way highway shall be positioned parallel to the curb or edge of the highway in the direction of authorized traffic movement with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the right edge of the righthand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
    (c) Angle parking.--Local authorities may permit angle parking on any highway after an engineering and traffic study has determined that the highway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic, except that on a State-designated highway prior approval of the department shall also be obtained.
    (d) Person with a disability and disabled veterans.--
     (1) When a motor vehicle bearing a person with adisability or severely disabled veteran plate or displaying a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran parking placard as prescribed in this title is being operated by or for the transportation of the person with a disability or severely disabled veteran, the driver shall be relieved of any liability for parking for a period of 60 minutes in excess of the legal parking period permitted by local authorities except where local ordinances or police regulations provide for the accommodation of heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or evening hours.
     (2) At the request of a person with a disability orseverely disabled veteran, local authorities may erect on the highway as close as possible to the person's or veteran's place of residence a sign or signs indicating that that place is reserved for a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran, that no parking is allowed there by others, and that any unauthorized person parking there shall be subject to a fine and may be towed. The absence of a sign stating the penalty amount indicated in subsection (f) at parking spaces designated with an international symbol for access for persons with disabilities on a sign shall not preclude the enforcement of this subsection. A vehicle may only be towed under this paragraph if the parking space is posted with a sign indicating that vehicles in violation of this section may be towed.
     (2.1)  Local authorities may limit access to a parking space reserved under paragraph (2) to a specific vehicle, license plate or other method of designation. Under this paragraph, local authorities may charge a reasonable fee and shall comply with section 6109 (relating to specific powers of department and local authorities) and the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327).
(3)  (i)  Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran registration plate or displaying a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran parking placard when such vehicles are being operated by or for the transportation of a person with a disability or a severely disabled veteran, no person shall park a vehicle on public or private property reserved for a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran which property has been so posted in accordance with departmental regulations.
Regulations shall require that parking spaces designated with an international symbol for access for persons with disabilities on a sign are posted with a sign stating the penalty amount indicated in subsection (f) and that vehicles in violation of the subsection may be towed and require that signs be replaced when they become either obsolete or missing with all costs to replace the necessary signs to be borne by the persons responsible for signing the particular location. The absence of a sign stating the penalty amount at parking spaces designated with an international symbol for access for persons with disabilities shall not preclude the enforcement of this subsection. A vehicle which is unlawfully parked in a designated person with a disability parking area may be removed from that area by towing and may be reclaimed by the vehicle owner upon payment of the towing costs. A vehicle may only be towed under this paragraph if the parking space is posted with a sign indicating that vehicles in violation of this section may be towed.
     (ii) Local authorities shall have the power and may,by ordinance or resolution, authorize a person with a disability and severely disabled veterans to issue statements to violators or violating vehicles for violation of subparagraph (i). The form of the statement shall be as prescribed by the local authorities.
     (iii) No occupancy or driveway permit may be issued toa person whose property is reserved for a person with a disability or a severely disabled veteran if the property is not posted with a sign stating the penalty amount indicated in subsection (f).
    (d.1)  Obstructing movement.--A person may not obstruct a space on public or private property reserved for a person with a disability or a part of a curb ramp or the access aisle adjacent to a parking space reserved for a person with a disability in a manner that would prevent a person or wheelchair or personal mobility device from entering or leaving a vehicle legally parked in an adjoining space.
    (e)  Unauthorized use.--An operator of a vehicle bearing a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran plate or displaying a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran parking placard shall not make use of the parking privileges accorded to a person with a disability and severely disabled veterans under subsection (d)(3) unless the operator is a person with a disability or a severely disabled veteran or unless the vehicle is being operated for the transportation of a person with a disability or severely disabled veteran.
    (e.1)  Motorcycle parking.--Notwithstanding the provisions of section 6301 (relating to prosecutions under local ordinances superseded by title) regarding parking violations, a local ordinance may not prohibit nor cite as a violation the parallel or angle occupancy by one or more motorcycles in any parking space on any highway otherwise available for parking for other individual vehicles, provided that the space occupied by one or more motorcycles does not exceed the space within which a single vehicle must park. In the instance of a violation applicable to any single vehicle, each motorcycle so parked shall be individually liable for any violation as if the motorcycle were the sole occupant of the parking space.
    (f) Penalty.--A person violating subsection (a), (b) or (d)(1) is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15. A person violating subsection (d)(2) or (3) or (e) is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200. If a person is convicted under subsection (d)(2) or (3) in the absence of a sign stating the penalty amount, the fine imposed may not exceed $50. A person violating subsection (d.1) is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300.
    (g) Special penalty; disposition.--
     (1) In addition to any other penalty imposed under thissection, a person who is convicted of violating subsection (d)
     (2) or (3) shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $50.
     (2)  All fines collected under this subsection shall be disposed of as follows:
     (i) Ninety-five percent shall be paid to the
Department of Revenue, transmitted to the Treasury
Department and credited to the Department of Public Welfare for use for the Attendant Care Program.
     (ii) Five percent shall be paid to the municipality inwhich the offense occurred.
    (h)  Definitions.--As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
    "Access aisle."  A physical area marked in accordance with departmental regulations:
     (1) designated by white or blue pavement marking hashmarks, cross-hatching or other similar visual no-parking indicators;
     (2) which provides additional space for a person using awheelchair, wheelchair lift or other mobility device; and
     (3) which is located adjacent to a parking space reservedfor a person with a disability.
    "Person with a disability."  A person issued a plate or placard.
"Plate or placard."  A plate or placard issued under:
     (1) Section 1338 (relating to person with disability plateand placard).
     (2) Section 1342(a) or (b) (relating to veteran plates andplacard).
(Nov. 9, 1977, P.L.226, No.69, eff. imd.; July 11, 1980, P.L.550,
No.113, eff. 60 days; Mar. 29, 1984, P.L.159, No.31, eff. imd.;
May 9, 1986, P.L.158, No.51, eff. 60 days; July 10, 1990, P.L.370,
No.84, eff. 60 days; Dec. 18, 1992, P.L.1411, No.174, eff. 60 days; Dec. 28, 1994, P.L.1441, No.170, eff. 60 days; Oct. 4, 2002,
P.L.845, No.123, eff. 60 days; Oct. 24, 2018, P.L.889, No.144, eff. 180 days)
2018 Amendment.  Act 144 amended subsec. (f) and added subsecs.
(d)(2.1), (d.1) and (h).
    2002 Amendment.  Act 123 amended subsecs. (d), (e), (f) and (g) and added subsec. (e.1).
    References in Text.  The Department of Public Welfare, referred to in this section, was redesignated as the Department of Human
Services by Act 132 of 2014.
Cross References.  Section 3354 is referred to in sections
3351, 6109 of this title.
§ 3355.  Removal of vehicles in a city of the first class.
    (a) Evidence of violation.--In cities of the first class, if a vehicle is found in violation of the provisions of this subchapter, prior to the removal of the vehicle, a towing and storage agent shall take digital photographs that clearly show all of the following:
     (1) The vehicle's license plate.
     (2) The violation for which the vehicle is being towed orremoved.
     (3) The posted sign, if any, identifying that unauthorizedstopping, standing or parking is prohibited where the vehicle was found and that unauthorized vehicles will be towed or removed.
    (b) Towing and storage agent responsibilities.--Prior to accepting payment for the towing and storage of a vehicle, upon request of the owner or lienholder of the vehicle, the towing and storage agent shall provide, without charge, a printed copy of the photographs to the owner or lienholder of a vehicle when the owner or lienholder claims the vehicle. Photographs shall be retained by the towing company for at least 60 days or until the vehicle is claimed, whichever is later.
    (c) Enforcement.--The parking authority in a city of the first class shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement this section. If deemed necessary, the parking authority may establish penalties for towing and storage agents who violate the provisions of this section.
    (d) Definitions.--As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
    "Towing and storage agent."  In a city of the first class, the parking authority or the parking authority's authorized agent. This term includes a person authorized to engage in the business of operating a wrecker or motor vehicle designed or constructed and used for the towing of abandoned or disabled vehicles. (July 8, 2024, P.L.521, No.43, eff. 60 days) 2024 Amendment.  Act 43 added section 3355.
SUBCHAPTER F
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
Sec.
3361. Driving vehicle at safe speed.
3362. Maximum speed limits.
3363. Alteration of maximum limits.
3364. Minimum speed regulation.
3365. Special speed limitations.
3366. Charging speed violations.
3367. Racing on highways and trafficways.
3368. Speed timing devices.
3369. Automated speed enforcement systems in active work zones.
3370. Automated speed enforcement system on designated highways.
3370.1. Automated speed enforcement study.
3371. Pilot program for automated speed enforcement systems indesignated school zones.
    Cross References.  Subchapter F is referred to in section 6109 of this title.
§ 3361.  Driving vehicle at safe speed.
    No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing, nor at a speed greater than will permit the driver to bring his vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Cross References.  Section 3361 is referred to in sections
1535, 3326, 3327, 3362, 3366, 3716 of this title.
§ 3362.  Maximum speed limits.
    (a)  General rule.--Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with section 3361 (relating to driving vehicle at safe speed), the limits specified in this section or established under this subchapter shall be maximum lawful speeds and no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the following maximum limits:
(1)  35 miles per hour in any urban district.
     (1.1)  65 miles per hour or 70 miles per hour for all vehicles on freeways where the department has posted a 65miles-per-hour or 70-miles-per-hour speed limit.
     (1.2)  25 miles per hour in a residence district if the highway:
     (i) is not a numbered traffic route; and
     (ii) is functionally classified by the department as alocal highway.
     (2) 55 miles per hour in other locations.
     (3) Any other maximum speed limit established under thissubchapter.
(b)  Posting of speed limit.--
     (1) No maximum speed limit established under subsection(a)(1), (1.2) or (3) shall be effective unless posted on fixed or variable official traffic-control devices erected in accordance with regulations adopted by the department which regulations shall require posting at the beginning and end of each speed zone and at intervals not greater than one-half mile.
     (2) No maximum speed limit established under subsection(a)(1.1) shall be effective unless posted on fixed or variable official traffic-control devices erected after each interchange on the portion of highway on which the speed limit is in effect and wherever else the department shall determine.
(c)  Penalty.--
     (1)  Any person violating this section is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of:
     (i) $42.50 for violating a maximum speed limit of 65 miles per hour or higher; or
     (ii) $35 for violating any other maximum speed limit.
(2)  Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more
than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
(June 13, 1995, P.L.57, No.9, eff. 30 days; Dec. 21, 1998,
P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days; June 26, 2001, P.L.734, No.75, eff. 60 days; Nov. 25, 2013, P.L.974, No.89, eff. imd.; Mar. 19, 2014, P.L.361, No.23, eff. imd.)
2014 Amendment.  Act 23 amended subsec. (a)(1.1).
    2013 Amendment.  Act 89 amended subsecs. (a) and (c). See the preamble to Act 89 in the appendix to this title for special provisions relating to legislative findings and declarations.
    1998 Amendment.  Act 151 amended subsec. (b)(1) and added subsec. (a)(1.2).
    1995 Amendment.  See section 4 of Act 9 in the appendix to this title for special provisions relating to report on effect of increased speed limit.
    Cross References.  Section 3362 is referred to in sections 1535, 1538, 3326, 3363, 3370, 3371, 3716, 6108, 6109, 6506 of this title.
§ 3363.  Alteration of maximum limits.
    On highways under their respective jurisdictions, local authorities subject to section 6109(e) (relating to specific powers of department and local authorities) or the department, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, may determine that the maximum speed permitted under this subchapter is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon any such highway or part thereof and establish a reasonable and safe maximum limit. The maximum speed limit may be made effective at all times or at times indicated and may vary for different weather conditions and other factors bearing on safe speeds. No maximum speed greater than 55 miles per hour shall be established under this section except on highways listed in section 3362(a)(1.1) (relating to maximum speed limits), where the maximum speed for all vehicles shall not be greater than 70 miles per hour.
(June 13, 1995, P.L.57, No.9, eff. 30 days; Dec. 21, 1998,
P.L.1126, No.151, eff. 60 days; Nov. 25, 2013, P.L.974, No.89, eff. imd.)
    2013 Amendment.  See the preamble to Act 89 in the appendix to this title for special provisions relating to legislative findings and declarations.
    1995 Amendment.  See section 4 of Act 9 in the appendix to this title for special provisions relating to report on effect of increased speed limit.
§ 3364.  Minimum speed regulation.
    (a) Impeding movement of traffic prohibited.--Except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic.
    (b) Slow moving vehicle to drive off roadway.--
     (1) Except when reduced speed is necessary for safeoperation or in compliance with law, whenever any person drives a vehicle upon a roadway having width for not more than one lane of traffic in each direction at less than the maximum posted speed and at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the driver shall, at the first opportunity when and where it is reasonable and safe to do so and after giving appropriate signal, drive completely off the roadway and onto the berm or shoulder of the highway. The driver may return to the roadway after giving appropriate signal only when the movement can be made in safety and so as not to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic.
     (2) A pedalcycle may be operated at a safe and reasonablespeed appropriate for the pedalcycle. A pedalcycle operator shall use reasonable efforts so as not to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic.
    (c) Establishment of minimum speed limits.--At any other time when the department or local authorities under their respective jurisdictions determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any highway or part of a highway impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the department or such local authority may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. The minimum limit shall be effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs. (Feb. 2, 2012, P.L.27, No.3, eff. 60 days)
2012 Amendment.  Act 3 amended subsec. (b).
Cross References.  Section 3364 is referred to in sections
4305, 6109 of this title.
§ 3365.  Special speed limitations.
(a)  Bridges and elevated structures.--
     (1) No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge orother elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure when the structure is posted with signs as provided in this subsection.
     (2) The department and local authorities on highways undertheir respective jurisdictions may conduct a traffic and engineering investigation of any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if it shall thereupon find that the structure cannot safely withstand vehicles traveling at the speed otherwise permissible under this title, the department or local authority shall determine and declare the maximum speed of vehicles which the structure can safely withstand, and shall cause or permit official traffic-control devices stating the maximum speed to be erected and maintained before each end of the structure.
     (3) Upon the trial of any person charged with a violationof this subsection, proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the department and the existence of the signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure.
    (b) School zones.--When passing through a school zone as defined and established under regulations of the department, no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour. An official traffic-control device shall indicate the beginning and end of each school zone to traffic approaching in each direction. Establishment of a school zone, including its location and hours of operation, shall be approved by the department.
    (c) Hazardous grades.--The department and local authorities on highways under their respective jurisdictions may conduct traffic and engineering investigations on grades which are considered hazardous. If the grade is determined to be hazardous, vehicles having a gross weight in excess of a determined safe weight may be further limited as to maximum speed and may be required to stop before proceeding downhill. The restrictions shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices erected and maintained according to regulations established by the department.
    (c.1)  Active work zones.--When passing through an active work zone, no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than the posted limit. An official traffic-control device shall indicate the beginning and end of each active work zone to traffic approaching in each direction.
(d)  Penalty.--
     (1)  Any person violating any provision of this section commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay:
     (i) Except as set forth under subparagraph (ii), afine of $35.
     (ii) For a violation of subsection (b), a fine of notmore than $500 if the person exceeds the maximum speed limit by more than 11 miles per hour.
     (2)  Any person exceeding a maximum speed limit established under this section by more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour in excess of the maximum speed limit.
(Oct. 10, 1980, P.L.791, No.147, eff. imd.; Dec. 23, 2002,
P.L.1982, No.229; Dec. 8, 2004, P.L.1791, No.237, eff. 150 days)
2004 Amendment.  Act 237 amended subsec. (d).
2002 Amendment.  Act 229 amended subsec. (b) and added subsec.
(c.1), effective in 60 days as to subsec. (b) and six months as to the remainder of the section.
Cross References.  Section 3365 is referred to in sections
1535, 1603, 3371 of this title.
§ 3366.  Charging speed violations.
    In every charge of violation of a speed provision in this subchapter, except for a violation of section 3361 (relating to driving vehicle at safe speed), the citation or complaint shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the applicable speed limit.
§ 3367.  Racing on highways and trafficways.
    (a) Definitions.--As used in this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection:
    "Drag race."  The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, for the purpose of comparing the relative speeds or power of acceleration of the vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit.
    "Drifting."  The act of steering a vehicle in a turn in an attempt to make the rear wheel or wheels of the vehicle lose traction and create a controlled or uncontrolled skid sideways.
    "Race."  The use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain, outdistance or prevent another vehicle from passing, to arrive at a given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles, or to test the physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long distance driving routes.
    (b) General rule.--No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway or trafficway in any race, speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration, or for the purpose of making a speed record, and no person shall in any manner participate in any such race, competition, contest, test or exhibition.
    (b.1)  Drifting.--No person shall engage in the drifting of a vehicle on a highway or trafficway.
    (c) Permits for special activities.--The department or local authorities within their jurisdiction may issue permits for special activities which would otherwise be prohibited by this section.
    (d) Penalties.--
     (1) A person violating subsection (b) commits a summaryoffense and shall, upon conviction for a first offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of $500.
     (2) A person violating subsection (b) commits a summaryoffense and shall, upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, and the vehicle or combination used in the commission of the offense shall be subject to an impoundment order for up to six months as follows:
     (i) The impoundment of the vehicle or combinationshall occur within the county where the offense was committed.
     (ii) Direct enforcement of the impoundment order shallbe conducted by a police officer, constable or impoundment official as directed by the judicial authority. In a city of the first class, second class, second class A and third class, the impoundment official shall be a parking authority of the municipality as authorized under section 6109 (relating to specific powers of department and local authorities) and 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 55 (relating to parking authorities).
     (iii) Except in a city of the first class, theappropriate law enforcement officer shall give immediate notice by the most expeditious means and by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the impoundment and location of the vehicle or combination to the owners of the vehicle or combination and any lienholders and, if applicable, any owners of the load, if the names and addresses of the owners and lienholders are known or can be ascertained by investigation. In a city of the first class, the
Philadelphia Parking Authority shall give immediate notice by first class mail, proof of mailing, of the impoundment and location of the vehicle or combination to the owners and lienholders of the vehicle or combination using reasonably available State databases.
     (iv) The costs of a police officer, constable orimpoundment official, appropriate law enforcement officer or the Philadelphia Parking Authority and all reasonable storage costs and all other reasonable costs incident to the impounding under subsections (b) and (c) shall be recoverable in addition to costs of prosecution.
     (v) The owners of the vehicle or combination which hasbeen subject to an impoundment order may obtain possession of the vehicle or combination upon the expiration or termination of the impoundment order as provided under this section by:
     (A) Furnishing proof of valid registration andfinancial responsibility.
     (B) Paying all costs and reasonable feesassociated with the impoundment order or making arrangements with the appropriate judicial authority to make payment of all costs and reasonable fees by installments as provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
     (vi) Any impounded vehicle or combination notrecovered within 30 days of the expiration or termination of the impoundment order under this subsection may be sold as an unclaimed vehicle under section 6310 (relating to disposition of impounded vehicles, combinations and loads).
     (vii) A vehicle shall not be subject to an impoundmentorder under this subsection if:
     (A) The vehicle was reported to a policedepartment as stolen and was not recovered prior to the time the violation under this section occurred.
     (B) The vehicle is a rental vehicle which shall beimmediately returned to the entity which issued the rental agreement.
     (viii)  An impoundment order issued under this subsection shall be immediately terminated by a court of competent jurisdiction if the owners of the vehicle submit evidence providing that the owners of the vehicle were not driving at the time of the violation. This subparagraph shall not apply if it is determined that:
     (A) the owners were present when the violationoccurred; or
     (B) the owners knowingly gave actual physicalcontrol of the movement of the vehicle to another person and had knowledge that the vehicle would be used to commit a violation under subsection (b).
     (ix) An impoundment order issued under this subsectionshall be immediately terminated by a court of competent jurisdiction if the conviction under subsection (b) is vacated, overturned, dismissed or withdrawn, or for which an individual has been pardoned.
     (x) For the purposes of this subsection, the lessee orlessor of a leased vehicle or a lienholder shall be considered the owner of a vehicle.
     (3) A person violating subsection (b.1) commits a summaryoffense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $250.
     (4) A person that knowingly organizes, controls orfinances two or more persons in a course of conduct that violates subsection (b) or (b.1) commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 per vehicle engaged in the conduct that violates subsection (b) or (b.1).
     (5) A person that knowingly organizes, controls orfinances two or more persons in a course of conduct that violates subsection (b) or (b.1) that results in the serious bodily injury or death of an individual commits a felony of the third degree.
(Oct. 16, 2024, P.L.992, No.103, eff. 11 months)
Cross References.  Section 3367 is referred to in sections
1532, 1542, 1553, 6310 of this title.
§ 3368.  Speed timing devices.
    (a) Speedometers authorized.--The rate of speed of any vehicle may be timed on any highway by a police officer using a motor vehicle equipped with a speedometer. In ascertaining the speed of a vehicle by the use of a speedometer, the speed shall be timed for a distance of not less than three-tenths of a mile.
    (b) Testing of speedometers.--The department may appoint stations for testing speedometers and may prescribe regulations as to the manner in which the test shall be made. Speedometers shall have been tested for accuracy within a period of one year prior to the alleged violation and immediately upon change of tire size. A certificate from the station showing that the test was made, the date of the test and the degree of accuracy of the speedometer shall be competent and prima facie evidence of those facts in every proceeding in which a violation of this title is charged.
    (c) Mechanical, electrical and electronic devicesauthorized.--
     (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rateof speed of any vehicle may be timed on any highway by a police officer using a mechanical or electrical speed timing device.
     (2) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (3),electronic devices such as radio-microwave devices, commonly referred to as electronic speed meters or radar, may be used only as part of an automated speed enforcement system or by members of the Pennsylvania State Police.
     (3) Electronic devices which calculate speed by measuringelapsed time between measured road surface points by using two sensors and devices which measure and calculate the average speed of a vehicle between any two points may be used by any police officer.
     (4) No person may be convicted upon evidence obtainedthrough the use of devices authorized by paragraphs (2) and (3) unless the speed recorded is six or more miles per hour in excess of the legal speed limit. Furthermore, no person may be convicted upon evidence obtained through the use of devices authorized by paragraph (3) in an area where the legal speed limit is less than 55 miles per hour if the speed recorded is less than ten miles per hour in excess of the legal speed limit. This paragraph shall not apply to evidence obtained through the use of devices authorized by paragraph (2) or (3) within a school zone or an active work zone.
     (5) Light detection and ranging devices, commonly referredto as LIDAR, may be used only as part of an automated speed enforcement system or by members of the Pennsylvania State
Police.
    (d) Classification, approval and testing of mechanical,electrical and electronic devices.--The department may, by regulation, classify specific devices as being mechanical, electrical or electronic. All mechanical, electrical or electronic devices shall be of a type approved by the department, which shall appoint stations for calibrating and testing the devices and may prescribe regulations as to the manner in which calibrations and tests shall be made. The certification and calibration of electronic devices under subsection (c)(3) shall also include the certification and calibration of all equipment, timing strips and other devices which are actually used with the particular electronic device being certified and calibrated. Electronic devices commonly referred to as electronic speed meters or radar shall have been tested for accuracy within a period of one year prior to the alleged violation. Other devices shall have been tested for accuracy within a period of 60 days prior to the alleged violation. A certificate from the station showing that the calibration and test were made within the required period and that the device was accurate shall be competent and prima facie evidence of those facts in every proceeding in which a violation of this title is charged.
    (e) Distance requirements for use of mechanical, electricaland electronic devices.--Mechanical, electrical or electronic devices may not be used to time the rate of speed of vehicles within 500 feet after a speed limit sign indicating a decrease of speed. This limitation on the use of speed timing devices shall not apply to speed limit signs indicating school zones, bridge and elevated structure speed limits, hazardous grade speed limits and work zone speed limits.
    (f) LIDAR testing and calibration.--
     (1) The department may, upon publication in thePennsylvania Bulletin, provide that LIDAR speed measuring devices and LIDAR systems shall be calibrated and tested using the testing procedures in department regulation.
     (2) LIDAR speed measuring devices and LIDAR systems shallbe calibrated and tested every 365 days at a minimum before being utilized by the Pennsylvania State Police or as part of an automated speed enforcement system.
     (3) The certification that the LIDAR device and system, asapplicable, have been tested and found to be accurate shall create a presumption that the requirements of this subsection have been fulfilled.
     (4) As used in this subsection, the following words andphrases shall have the meanings given to them in this paragraph unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
     "LIDAR."  The technology of measuring target range using reflected light to determine target range and speed from the time-of-flight of laser pulses.
     "LIDAR speed-measuring device."  Speed-measuring equipment that determines target range and speed based on the time-offlight of laser light pulses reflected off a target.
     "LIDAR system."  A LIDAR speed-measuring device that incorporates additional equipment that is used to gather, process and record images, as applicable, to be used as part of speed enforcement efforts.
(July 11, 1985, P.L.204, No.52, eff. 60 days; Mar. 27, 1986,
P.L.71, No.24, eff. imd.; Dec. 23, 2002, P.L.1982, No.229, eff. 6 months; Nov. 26, 2008, P.L.1658, No.133, eff. 60 days; Oct. 19, 2018, P.L.563, No.86, eff. imd.)
    2018 Amendment.  Act 86 amended subsec. (c)(2) and added subsecs. (c)(5) and (f).
2008 Amendment.  Act 133 amended subsecs. (b) and (d).
2002 Amendment.  Act 229 amended subsec. (c)(4).
1986 Amendment.  Act 24 amended subsecs. (c) and (d).
1985 Amendment.  Act 52 amended subsec. (c) and added subsec.
(e).
Cross References.  Section 3368 is referred to in sections
3369, 3370, 3371 of this title.
§ 3369.  Automated speed enforcement systems in active work zones.
    (a) Establishment.--A program is established to provide for automated speed enforcement systems in active work zones.
    (b) Applicability.--This section shall apply to Federal aid highways only under the jurisdiction of the department and the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission. An automated speed enforcement system may not be used unless:
     (1) At least two appropriate warning signs areconspicuously placed before the active work zone notifying the public that an automated speed enforcement system is in use.
     (2) The first warning sign under paragraph (1) shall:
     (i) Be the largest size available in conformance with
Federal regulations, unless the department or the
Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission determines that a smaller size is necessary to ensure the safety of the work zone.
     (ii) Clearly and accurately indicate if the automatedspeed enforcement system is active and in use.
     (iii) Be placed at least 1,000 feet before the activework zone, unless the department or the Pennsylvania
Turnpike Commission determines that a lesser distance is necessary to ensure the safety of the work zone, comply with Federal regulations or provide adequate traffic control in the work zone and is capable of providing the most advanced notification as practical.
     (iv) Be followed immediately by the posted speed limitof the active work zone and prior to the placement of the automated speed enforcement system. (3)  An appropriate sign is conspicuously placed in the middle, if appropriate, and at the end of the active work zone.
     (3.1)  The posted speed limit of the active work zone is placed at an appropriate location within the active work zone to provide adequate notice to drivers.
     (4)  A notice identifying the location of the specific highway segment where the automated speed enforcement system is
in use and posted at the active work zone and on the department's or Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission's publicly accessible Internet website. The notice on the websites shall remain throughout the period of use.
    (c)  Liability.--Driving in excess of the posted speed limit in an automated speed enforcement work area by at least 11 miles per hour is a violation of this section.
    (c.1)  Owner liability.--For each violation under this section, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable for the penalty imposed unless the owner is convicted of the same violation under another provision of this title or has a defense under subsection (g). For the purposes of this section, the lessee of a leased vehicle shall be considered the owner of a motor vehicle.
(d)  Notice of violation.--
(1)  (i)  An action to enforce this section shall be initiated by an administrative notice of violation to the owner of a motor vehicle identified by an automated speed enforcement system as violating this section. A notice of violation based upon inspection of recorded images produced by an automated speed enforcement system and sworn or affirmed by an authorized member of the Pennsylvania State Police shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in the notice. The Pennsylvania State Police shall receive certification from the department, the Pennsylvania
Turnpike Commission or the system administrator when an automated speed enforcement system is active in accordance with subsection (b).
     (ii) The notice of violation must include writtenverification that the automated speed enforcement system was operating correctly at the time of the alleged violation and the date of the most recent inspection that confirms the automated speed enforcement system to be operating properly.
     (iii) An automated speed enforcement system operatorshall complete training offered by the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system, including training on any devices critical to the operation of the system, or the manufacturer's or vendor's representative in the procedures for setting up, testing and operating an automated speed enforcement system. Upon completion of the training, the manufacturer or vendor or manufacturer's or vendor's representative shall issue a signed certificate to the automated speed enforcement system operator, which shall be admitted as evidence in any court proceeding for a violation involving an automated speed enforcement system. An automated speed enforcement system operator shall fill out and sign a daily log for an automated speed enforcement system, which:
     (A) states the date, time and location of the
system setup;
     (B) states that the automated speed enforcementsystem operator successfully performed and the automated speed enforcement system passed the selftests specified by the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system;
     (C) shall be kept on file; and
     (D) shall be admitted in any proceeding for aviolation involving an automated speed enforcement system.
     (iv) An automated speed enforcement system shallundergo an annual calibration check performed by a calibration laboratory. The calibration laboratory shall issue a signed certificate of calibration after the annual calibration check, which shall be kept on file and shall be admitted as evidence in any proceeding for a violation involving an automated speed enforcement system.
     (v) The following shall be attached to the notice ofviolation:
     (A) A copy of the recorded image showing the motorvehicle with its license plate visible.
     (B) The registration number and state of issuanceof the motor vehicle registration.
     (C) Verification that the automated speedenforcement system was operating correctly at the time of the alleged violation and the date of the most recent inspection that confirms the automated speed enforcement system to be operating properly.
     (D) The date, time and place of the allegedviolation.
     (E) Notice that the violation charged is underthis section.
     (F) Instructions for return of the notice ofviolation.
     (2) In the case of a violation involving a motor vehiclesubject to the laws of this Commonwealth, the notice of violation shall be mailed within 30 days after the commission of the violation or within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the owner, whichever is later, to the address of the owner as listed in the records of the department.
     (3) In the case of a violation involving a motor vehiclefrom a jurisdiction other than this Commonwealth, the notice of violation shall be mailed within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the owner to the address of the owner as listed in the records of the official in the jurisdiction having charge of the registration of the vehicle.
     (4) A notice of violation shall be invalid unless providedto the owner within 90 days of the offense.
     (5) The notice shall include the following text: This notice shall be returned personally, by mail or by an agent duly authorized in writing, within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice. A hearing may be obtained upon the written request of the owner.
     (6) Notice of violation must be sent by first class mail.A manual or automatic record of mailing prepared by the system administrator in the ordinary course of business shall be prima facie evidence of mailing and shall be admissible in a judicial or administrative proceeding as to the facts contained in the notice.
(e) Penalty.--
     (1) If a person violates this section as a first offense,the person shall receive a written warning.
     (2) The penalty for a violation under this section shallbe a fine of $75 for the second offense and $150 for the third and subsequent offenses, and the fine shall not be subject to 42 Pa.C.S. § 3571 (relating to Commonwealth portion of fines, etc.) or 3573 (relating to municipal corporation portion of fines, etc.).
     (2.1)  A person does not commit a second or subsequent offense unless the second offense occurs at least 15 days after the mailing date of the written warning.
(3) The fine or warning is not authorized during timeswhen the automated speed enforcement work area is not active and not in use.
(4) A penalty imposed under this section shall not: (i)  be deemed a criminal conviction;
(ii)  be made part of the operating record of the individual upon whom the penalty is imposed under section
1535 (relating to schedule of convictions and points);
     (iii) be the subject of merit rating for insurancepurposes; or
     (iv) authorize imposition of surcharge points in theprovision of motor vehicle insurance coverage.
     (5)  If a person who has a prior violation of this section before the effective date of this paragraph commits another violation of this section after the effective date of this paragraph, the violation after the effective date of this paragraph shall be deemed a first offense and any violation occurring after that violation shall constitute an additional offense.
(f) Limitations.--
     (1) Recorded images collected as part of the automatedspeed enforcement system may record only violations of this section and may not be used for any other surveillance purposes. The restrictions provided in this paragraph shall not preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials, if the information is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action and is reasonably described.
     (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law,information gathered and maintained under this section that is kept by the Commonwealth, its authorized agents or its employees, including recorded images, written records, motor vehicle information, reports or facsimiles, names and addresses, shall be for the exclusive purpose of discharging its duties under this section. The information shall not be deemed a public record under the act of February 14, 2008
(P.L.6, No.3), known as the Right-to-Know Law. The information shall not be discoverable by court order or otherwise or be admissible as evidence in a proceeding except to determine liability under this section. The restrictions provided in this paragraph shall not preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials, if the information is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action and is reasonably described.
     (3) Recorded images obtained through the use of automatedspeed enforcement systems deployed as a means of promoting traffic safety in automated speed enforcement work areas shall be destroyed within one year of final disposition of a notice of violation, except that images subject to a court order under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be destroyed within two years after the date of the order, unless further extended by court order.
The department, the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission or the system administrator shall retain evidence that the records have been destroyed in accordance with this section.
     (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, motorvehicle owner information obtained as a result of the operation of an automated speed enforcement system under this section shall be the exclusive property of the Commonwealth and not the property of the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system and may not be used for a purpose other than prescribed in this section.
     (5) An intentional violation of this subsection shallconstitute a misdemeanor of the third degree punishable by a $500 fine. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (g)  Defenses.--
     (1) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the motor vehicle was reported to a police department as stolen prior to the time the violation occurred and was not recovered prior to that time.
     (2) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person receiving the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the offense.
     (3) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the automated speed enforcement system being used to determine speed was not in compliance with section 3368 (relating to speed timing devices) with respect to testing for accuracy, certification or calibration.
     (4) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person named in the notice of the violation was not driving the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. The department or system administrator may require the owner to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the time of the alleged violation. The owner of the motor vehicle may not be required to disclose the identity of the driver of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation.
(h)  Authority and duties of department and Pennsylvania
Turnpike Commission.--
(1) The department and Pennsylvania Turnpike Commissionshall establish an automated speed enforcement system program.
(2) (i)  The department and Pennsylvania TurnpikeCommission may promulgate regulations for the certification and the use of automated speed enforcement systems.
     (ii)  In order to facilitate the prompt implementation of this section, regulations promulgated by the department and Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission under this section shall be deemed temporary regulations and not subject to:
     (A) Sections 201, 202, 203, 204 and 205 of the actof July 31, 1968 (P.L.769, No.240), referred to as the
Commonwealth Documents Law.
     (B) Section 204(b) of the act of October 15, 1980
(P.L.950, No.164), known as the Commonwealth Attorneys Act.
     (C)  The act of June 25, 1982 (P.L.633, No.181), known as the Regulatory Review Act.
(3) (i)  The department and Pennsylvania TurnpikeCommission shall serve directly or through a contracted private service with a manufacturer or vendor as the system administrator of the program. Compensation under a contract authorized by this paragraph shall be based only upon the value of equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the automated speed enforcement system program and may not be based on the quantity of notices of violation issued or amount of fines imposed or generated.
     (ii) The system administrator shall prepare and issuenotices of violation.
     (iii) Two restricted accounts are established in the
State Treasury for fines remitted under this section to the department and Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission,
respectively. The system administrator of the department or
Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, if any, shall send an invoice to the department or Pennsylvania Turnpike
Commission based, respectively, on the services under subparagraph (i) and the Pennsylvania State Police under subsection (d)(1)(i). The department, Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission and the Pennsylvania State Police shall use the
appropriate restricted account to pay for the administration of the program and the system administrator's invoice costs, if applicable. Remaining fines shall be allocated by the department or Pennsylvania
Turnpike Commission to develop a Work Zone and Highway
Safety Program. At a minimum, funds from the Work Zone and
Highway Safety Program shall be used for improvement projects, enforcements and countermeasures to improve the safety in work zones and on highways. Funds may also be used to increase awareness of distracted driving and transportation enhancements established under section 3116 (relating to automated red light enforcement systems in first class cities).
(A) (Deleted by amendment).
(B) (Deleted by amendment).
(C) (Deleted by amendment).
     (iv) (Deleted by amendment).
     (v) (Deleted by amendment).
     (vi) (Deleted by amendment).
     (vii) (Deleted by amendment).
     (viii) The system administrator shall provide anappropriate form by which owners of the motor vehicles may challenge a notice of violation. A hearing to contest liability may be in person or be conducted through livestream synchronous video conferencing or similar virtual presence technology and shall be only at reasonable times set by the system administrator. Challenges to be heard in person shall be conducted in, at least, Erie, Harrisburg, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Scranton. The form may be included with or as part of the notice of violation.
     (4)  Not later than April 1 annually, the department, the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission and the Pennsylvania State
Police shall submit a report on the program for the preceding calendar year to the chairperson and minority chairperson of the Transportation Committee of the Senate and the chairperson and minority chairperson of the Transportation Committee of the House of Representatives. The report shall be a public record under the Right-to-Know Law and include:
     (i) The number of vehicular accidents and relatedserious bodily injuries and deaths in all work zones and in automated speed enforcement work areas where the program operated.
     (ii) Speed data.
     (iii) The number of notices of violation issued andcontested.
     (iv) The amount of fines imposed and collected.
     (v) Amounts paid under contracts authorized by thissection.
     (vi) (Deleted by amendment).
     (vii) Use of funds under paragraph (3)(iii).
(i) Payment of fine.--
     (1) An owner of a motor vehicle may admit responsibilityfor the violation and pay the fine provided in the notice personally, through an authorized agent, electronically or by mailing both payment and the notice of violation to the system administrator.
     (2) Payment by mail must be made only by money order,credit card or check made payable to the Commonwealth, the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission or the system administrator, as applicable.
     (3) Payment of the fine shall operate as a finaldisposition of the case.
     (4) If payment is not received within 90 days of themailing of the notice of violation, the department or Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission may request an applicable credit collection agency to resolve the payment amount owed.
(j) Contest.--
     (1) An owner of a motor vehicle may, within 30 days of themailing date of the notice, request a hearing to contest liability by appearing before the system administrator either personally or by an authorized agent or by sending a request on the prescribed form. A hearing to contest liability may be in person or be conducted through live-stream synchronous video conferencing or similar virtual presence technology as described under subsection (h)(3)(viii).
     (2) Upon receipt of a hearing request, the systemadministrator shall in a timely manner schedule the matter before a hearing officer designated by the department or
Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission. Written notice of the date, time and place of hearing must be presented or sent by first class mail to the owner of the motor vehicle.
     (3) The hearing shall be informal and the rules ofevidence shall not apply. The decision of the hearing officer shall be made within 45 days from the hearing date and shall be final, subject to the right of the owner of the motor vehicle to appeal the decision under paragraph (4).
     (4) If, within 45 days of issuance of the decision of thehearing officer, the owner of the motor vehicle requests in writing an appeal of the decision of the hearing officer, the owner of the motor vehicle shall file the notice of violation and supporting documents with the office of the magisterial district judge for the magisterial district where the violation occurred, and a magisterial district judge shall hear and decide the matter de novo and shall be restricted to finding an owner liable or not liable for violating this section.
(k) Expiration.--(Deleted by amendment).
(Oct. 19, 2018, P.L.563, No.86; Dec. 14, 2023, P.L.344, No.38)
2023 Amendment.  Act 38 amended subsecs. (b), (c.1), (d)(1),
(2), (3), (4) and (5), (e), (f), (g), (h)(1), (3) and (4), (i) and (j) and deleted subsec. (k), effective immediately as to the amendment of subsec. (k) and 60 days as to the remainder of the section.
    2018 Amendment.  Act 86 added section 3369. Section 6 of Act 86 provided that subsec. (c) shall take effect 60 days after publication in the Pennsylvania Bulletin and 120 days as to the remainder of the section. See section 4 of Act 86 in the appendix to this title for special provisions relating to notice. § 3370.  Automated speed enforcement system on designated highways.
    (a) General rule.--A program is established to provide for an automated speed enforcement system on U.S. Route 1 (Roosevelt
Boulevard) between Ninth Street and the Philadelphia County line shared with Bucks County in a city of the first class. The following shall apply:
     (1) A city of the first class, upon passage of anordinance, is authorized to enforce section 3362 (relating to maximum speed limits) on Roosevelt Boulevard by recording violations using an automated speed enforcement system approved by the department.
     (2) (Deleted by amendment).
     (3) A city of the first class may expand the automatedspeed enforcement system beyond Roosevelt Boulevard to no more than five corridors if the following conditions are met:
     (i) The city of the first class, in consultation withthe department, proposes a new State or local highway corridor within the borders of the city of the first class according to speed data and speed-related accidents involving vehicles or pedestrians. Each proposed corridor must include a beginning segment and an end segment on the same State or local route within the borders of the city of the first class.
     (ii) The city of the first class conducts anengineering and traffic investigation under section 6109(e)
(relating to specific powers of department and local authorities) on the posted speed limit within a proposed State or local highway corridor for an automated speed enforcement system.
     (iii) The city of the first class provides at leastone opportunity for public comment regarding the proposed
State or local highway corridor.
     (4)  When the conditions under paragraph (3) have been met, a city of the first class, upon passage of an ordinance for each new corridor, is authorized to enforce section 3362 by recording violations using an automated speed enforcement system approved by the department.
    (b) Owner liability.--For each violation under this section, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable for the penalty imposed unless the owner is convicted of the same violation under another section of this title or has a defense under subsection (g). For the purposes of this section, the lessee of a leased vehicle shall be considered the owner of the motor vehicle.
    (c) Certificate as evidence.--A certificate, or a facsimile of a certificate, based upon inspection of recorded images produced by an automated speed enforcement system and sworn to or affirmed by a police officer employed by the city of the first class shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it. The city must include written documentation that the automated speed enforcement system was operating correctly at the time of the alleged violation. A recorded image evidencing a violation of section 3362 shall be admissible in any judicial or administrative proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the violation.
    (d) Penalty.--The following shall apply:
     (1) The penalty for a violation under subsection (a) shallbe a fine of $150 unless a lesser amount is set by ordinance.
The ordinance may create fines for first offense, second offense and third and subsequent offenses, but no single fine shall exceed $150.
     (2) A penalty is authorized only for a violation of thissection if each of the following apply:
       (i) At least two appropriate warning signs areconspicuously placed at the beginning and end and at twomile intervals of the designated highway notifying the public that an automated speed enforcement system is in use.
       (ii) A notice identifying the location of theautomated speed enforcement system is posted on the city of the first class's or system administrator's publicly accessible Internet website throughout the period of use. (3)  A fine is not authorized during the first 30 days of operation of an automated speed enforcement system.
     (4) The system administrator may provide a written warningto the owner of a motor vehicle determined to have violated this section during the first 30 days of operation of the automated speed enforcement system.
     (5) A penalty imposed under this section shall not bedeemed a criminal conviction and shall not be made part of the operating record under section 1535 (relating to schedule of convictions and points) of the individual upon whom the penalty is imposed, nor may the imposition of the penalty be subject to merit rating for insurance purposes.
     (6) No surcharge points may be imposed in the provision ofmotor vehicle insurance coverage. Penalties collected under this section shall not be subject to 42 Pa.C.S. § 3571 (relating to Commonwealth portion of fines, etc.) or 3573 (relating to municipal corporation portion of fines, etc.).
     (7) If a person who has a prior violation of this sectionbefore the effective date of this paragraph commits another violation of this section after the effective date of this paragraph, the violation after the effective date of this paragraph shall be deemed a first offense and any violation occurring after that violation shall constitute an additional offense.
    (e) Liability.--Driving in excess of the posted speed limit along the designated highway by 11 miles per hour or more is a violation of this section.
    (f) Limitations.--The following shall apply:
     (1) No automated speed enforcement system shall beutilized in such a manner as to take a frontal view recorded image of the motor vehicle as evidence of having committed a violation.
     (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, cameraequipment deployed as part of an automated speed enforcement system as provided in this section must be incapable of automated or user-controlled remote surveillance by means of recorded video images. Recorded images collected as part of the automated speed enforcement system must only record traffic violations and may not be used for any other surveillance purposes, but may include video of the area enforced when triggered by a violation. The restrictions set forth in this paragraph shall not be deemed to preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials if the information is reasonably described and is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action.
     (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law,information prepared under this section and information relating to violations under this section which is kept by the city of the first class or system administrator, its authorized agents or its employees, including recorded images, written records, reports or facsimiles, names, addresses, motor vehicle information and the number of violations under this section, shall be for the exclusive use of the city, its authorized agents, its employees and law enforcement officials for the purpose of discharging their duties under this section and under any ordinances and resolutions of the city. The information shall not be deemed a public record under the act of February 14, 2008 (P.L.6, No.3), known as the Right-to-Know Law. The information shall not be discoverable by court order or otherwise, nor shall it be offered in evidence in any action or proceeding which is not directly related to a violation of this section or any ordinance or resolution of the city. The restrictions set forth in this paragraph shall not be deemed to preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials if the information is reasonably described and is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action.
     (4) Recorded images obtained through the use of automatedspeed enforcement systems deployed as a means of promoting traffic safety in a city of the first class shall be destroyed within one year of final disposition of any recorded event except that images subject to a court order under paragraph (2) or (3) shall be destroyed within two years after the date of the order, unless further extended by court order. The city shall file notice with the department that the records have been destroyed in accordance with this section.
     (5) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, motorvehicle owner information obtained as a result of the operation of an automated speed enforcement system under this section shall not be the property of the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system and may not be used for any purpose other than as prescribed in this section.
     (6) An intentional violation of this subsection shallconstitute a misdemeanor of the third degree punishable by a $500 fine. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
    (g) Defenses.--The following shall apply:
     (1) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person named in the notice of the violation was not driving the motor vehicle at the time of the violation.
The owner of the motor vehicle may be required to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the time of the alleged violation. The city of the first class may not require the owner of the motor vehicle to disclose the identity of the driver of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation.
     (2) If an owner of a motor vehicle receives a notice ofviolation pursuant to this section of a time period during which the motor vehicle was reported to a police department as having been stolen, it shall be a defense to a violation under this section that the motor vehicle has been reported to a police department as stolen prior to the time the violation occurred and had not been recovered prior to that time.
     (3) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person receiving the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the offense.
     (4) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the automated speed enforcement system being used to determine speed was not in compliance with section 3368 (relating to speed timing devices) with respect to testing for accuracy, certification or calibration.
    (h) Department approval.--
     (1) No automated speed enforcement system may be usedwithout the approval of the department, which shall have the authority to promulgate regulations for the certification and use of the systems which regulations may include the use of radio-microwave devices, commonly referred to as electronic speed meters or radar, or light detection and ranging devices, commonly referred to as LIDAR, in their operations.
     (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, thedevices identified in paragraph (1) shall be tested for accuracy at regular intervals as designated by regulation of the department.
    (i) Duty of city.--The following provisions shall apply:
     (1) A city of the first class may not use an automatedspeed enforcement system unless there is posted an appropriate sign in a conspicuous place before the area in which the automated speed enforcement system is to be used notifying the public that an automated speed enforcement system is in use immediately ahead.
     (2) A city of the first class shall designate or appointthe Philadelphia Parking Authority as the system administrator to supervise and coordinate the administration of notices of violation issued under this section. Compensation under a contract authorized by this paragraph shall be based only upon the value of equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the automated speed enforcement system program and may not be based on the quantity of notices of violation issued or amount of fines imposed or generated.
     (3) The system administrator shall prepare a notice ofviolation to the owner of a motor vehicle identified in a recorded image produced by an automated speed enforcement system as evidence of a violation of section 3362. The notice of violation must be issued by a police officer employed by the police department with primary jurisdiction over the area where the violation occurred. The notice of violation shall have the following attached to it:
     (i) a copy of the recorded image showing the motorvehicle;
     (ii) the registration number and state of issuance ofthe motor vehicle registration;
     (iii) the date, time and place of the allegedviolation;
     (iv) notice that the violation charged is undersection 3362; and
     (v) instructions for return of the notice ofviolation, which shall read:
This notice shall be returned personally, by mail or by an agent duly authorized in writing, within 30 days of issuance. A hearing may be obtained upon the written request of the owner of the motor vehicle.
    (j) System administrator.--The following shall apply:
     (1) The system administrator may hire and designatepersonnel as necessary or contract for services through a manufacturer or vendor to implement this section.
     (2) The system administrator shall process notices ofviolation and penalties issued under this section.
     (3) Not later than September 1 annually, the systemadministrator shall submit an annual report to the chairperson and the minority chairperson of the Transportation Committee of the Senate and the chairperson and minority chairperson of the Transportation Committee of the House of Representatives. The report shall be considered a public record under the Right-to-
Know Law and include for the prior year:
     (i) The number of violations and fines issued and dataregarding the speeds of motor vehicles in the enforcement area.
     (ii) A compilation of penalties paid and outstanding
and violations contested.
     (iii) The amount of money paid to a vendor ormanufacturer under this section.
     (iv) The number of vehicular and pedestrian accidentsand related serious bodily injuries and deaths along the designated highway.
    (k) Notice to owner.--In the case of a violation involving a motor vehicle subject to the laws of this Commonwealth, the notice of violation must be mailed within 30 days after the commission of the violation or within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the owner of the motor vehicle, whichever is later, and not thereafter to the address of the owner as listed in the records of the department. In the case of motor vehicles from jurisdictions other than this Commonwealth, the notice of violation must be mailed within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the owner to the address of the owner as listed in the records of the official in the jurisdiction having charge of the registration of the motor vehicle. A notice of violation under this section must be provided to the owner of the motor vehicle within 90 days of the commission of the offense.
    (l) Mailing of notice and records.--Notice of violation must be sent by first class mail. A manual or automatic record of mailing prepared by the system administrator in the ordinary course of business shall be prima facie evidence of mailing and shall be admissible in any judicial or administrative proceeding as to the facts contained in it.
    (m) Payment of fine.--The following shall apply:
     (1) An owner of a motor vehicle to whom a notice ofviolation has been issued may admit responsibility for the violation and pay the fine provided in the notice.
     (2) Payment must be made personally, through an authorizedagent, electronically or by mailing both payment and the notice of violation to the system administrator. Payment by mail must be made only by money order, credit card or check made payable to the system administrator. The system administrator shall remit the fine, less the system administrator's operation and maintenance costs necessitated by this section, to the department for deposit into a restricted receipts account in the Motor License Fund. Fines deposited in the fund under this paragraph shall be used by the department for a Transportation
Enhancement Grants Program as established by section 3116
(relating to automated red light enforcement systems in first class cities). The department shall award transportation enhancement grants on a competitive basis. The department may pay actual administrative costs arising from the department's administration of this section. The department may not reserve, designate or set aside a specific level of funds or percentage of funds to an applicant prior to the completion of the application process, nor may the department designate a set percentage of funds to an applicant. Grants shall be awarded by the department based on the majority vote of a selection committee consisting of four representatives of the department appointed by the secretary and four members appointed by the mayor of the city of the first class, with the secretary or a designee of the secretary serving as chairperson. Priority shall be given to applications seeking grant funds for transportation enhancements in the municipality where the automated speed camera system is operated.
     (3) Payment of the established fine and applicablepenalties shall operate as a final disposition of the case.
    (n) Hearing.--The following shall apply:
     (1) An owner of a motor vehicle to whom a notice of
violation has been issued may, within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice, request a hearing to contest the liability alleged in the notice. A hearing request must be made by appearing before the system administrator during regular office hours either personally or by an authorized agent or by sending a request on the prescribed form.
     (2) Upon receipt of a hearing request, the systemadministrator shall in a timely manner schedule the matter before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be designated by the city of the first class. Written notice of the date, time and place of hearing must be sent by first class mail to the owner of the motor vehicle. A hearing to contest liability may be in person or be conducted through live-stream synchronous video conferencing or similar virtual presence technology and shall be only at the locations and times set by the system administrator.
     (3) The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.Ch. 5 (relating to practice and procedure) and will be subject to appeal pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7 (relating to judicial review).
    (o) Compensation to manufacturer or vendor.--If a city of the first class has established an automated speed enforcement system, the compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system may not be based upon the number of traffic citations issued or a portion or percentage of the fine generated by the citations. The compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the equipment shall be based upon the value of the equipment and the services provided or rendered in support of the automated speed enforcement system.
    (p) Revenue limitation.--A city of the first class may not collect an amount equal to or greater than 2% of its annual budget from the collection of revenue from the issuance and payment of violations under this section.
    (q) Expiration.--(Deleted by amendment).
(Oct. 19, 2018, P.L.563, No.86; Dec. 14, 2023, P.L.344, No.38)
2023 Amendment.  Act 38 amended the heading and subsecs. (a),
(b), (d)(2) and (4), (f), (g), (i), (j)(1) and (3), (k), (m)(1), (n)(1) and (2) and (o), added subsec. (d)(7) and deleted subsec.
(q), effective immediately as to the amendment of subsec. (q) and 60 days as to the remainder of the section.
    2018 Amendment.  Act 86 added section 3370. Section 6 of Act 86 provided that subsec. (e) shall take effect 60 days after publication in the Pennsylvania Bulletin and 60 days as to the remainder of the section. See section 5 of Act 86 in the appendix to this title for special provisions relating to notice.
§ 3370.1.  Automated speed enforcement study.
    The Local Government Commission shall conduct a study of expanding automated speed enforcement on highways and streets owned by municipalities. No later than two years after the effective date of this section, the Local Government Commission shall submit a report to the General Assembly and shall provide findings and recommendations on the expansion of automated speed enforcement on highways and streets owned by municipalities. (Dec. 14, 2023, P.L.344, No.38, eff. imd.)
2023 Amendment.  Act 38 added section 3370.1.
§ 3371.  Pilot program for automated speed enforcement systems in designated school zones.
    (a) General rule.--A pilot program is established to provide for an automated speed enforcement system in designated school zones in a city of the first class. The following shall apply:
     (1) This section shall only be applicable in a city of thefirst class in no more than five school zones agreed upon by the system administrator, on the city's behalf, and the secretary.
     (2) A city of the first class shall conduct an engineeringand traffic investigation under section 6109(e) (relating to specific powers of department and local authorities) on the posted speed limit within the proposed school zone for an automated speed enforcement system.
     (3) A city of the first class shall provide at least oneopportunity for public comment regarding the proposed school zone.
     (4) When the requirements under paragraphs (2) and (3) aremet, a city of the first class, upon passage of an ordinance for the school zones, is authorized to enforce section 3365(b) (relating to special speed limitations) by recording violations using an automated speed enforcement system approved by the department.
    (b) Owner liability.--For each violation under this section, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable for the penalty imposed under subsection (d) unless the owner is convicted of the same violation under another section of this title or has a defense under subsection (g). For the purposes of this section, the lessee of a leased vehicle shall be considered the owner of a motor vehicle.
    (c) Certificate as evidence.--A certificate, or a facsimile of a certificate, based upon inspection of recorded images produced by an automated speed enforcement system and sworn to or affirmed by a police officer employed by the city of the first class shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it. The city must include written documentation that the automated speed enforcement system was operating correctly at the time of the alleged violation. A recorded image evidencing a violation of section 3365(b) shall be admissible in any judicial or administrative proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the violation.
    (d) Penalty.--
     (1) The penalty for a violation under subsection (a) shallbe a fine of $150 unless a lesser amount is set by ordinance.
The ordinance may create fines for a first offense, second offense and third and subsequent offenses, but no single fine shall exceed $150.
     (2) A penalty is authorized only for a violation of thissection if each of the following apply:
     (i) At least two appropriate warning signs areconspicuously placed at the beginning and end of the designated school zone notifying the public that an automated speed enforcement system is active and in use.
     (ii) A notice identifying the location of theautomated speed enforcement system is posted on the city's or system administrator's publicly accessible Internet website throughout the period of use.
     (iii) The designated school zone is active asindicated by an official traffic-control device with a posted speed limit of no greater than 15 miles per hour. (3)  A fine is not authorized during the first 30 days of operation of an automated speed enforcement system.
     (4) The system administrator may provide a written warningto the registered owner of a motor vehicle determined to have violated this section during the first 30 days of operation of the automated speed enforcement system.
     (5) A penalty imposed under this section shall not bedeemed a criminal conviction and shall not be made part of the operating record under section 1535 (relating to schedule of convictions and points) of the individual upon whom the penalty is imposed, nor may the imposition of the penalty be subject to merit rating for insurance purposes.
     (6) Surcharge points may not be imposed in the provisionof motor vehicle insurance coverage. Penalties collected under this section shall not be subject to 42 Pa.C.S. § 3571 (relating to Commonwealth portion of fines, etc.) or 3573 (relating to municipal corporation portion of fines, etc.).
    (e) Liability.--Driving in excess of the posted speed limit in a designated school zone by 11 miles per hour or more is a violation of this section.
    (f) Limitations.--
     (1) An automated speed enforcement system may not beutilized in such a manner as to take a frontal view recorded image of the motor vehicle as evidence of having committed a violation.
     (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, cameraequipment deployed as part of an automated speed enforcement system as provided in this section must be incapable of automated or user-controlled remote surveillance by means of recorded video images. Recorded images collected as part of the automated speed enforcement system must only record traffic violations and may not be used for any other surveillance purposes, but may include video of the area enforced when triggered by a violation. The restrictions set forth in this paragraph shall not be deemed to preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials if the information is reasonably described and is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action.
     (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law,information prepared under this section and information related to violations under this section which is kept by the city of the first class, its authorized agents or its employees, including recorded images, written records, reports or facsimiles, names, addresses, motor vehicle information and the number of violations under this section, shall be for the exclusive use of the city, its authorized agents, its employees and law enforcement officials for the purpose of discharging their duties under this section and under any ordinances and resolutions of the city. The information shall not be deemed a public record under the act of February 14, 2008 (P.L.6, No.3), known as the Right-to-Know Law. The information shall not be discoverable by court order or otherwise, nor shall it be offered in evidence in any action or proceeding which is not directly related to a violation of this section or any ordinance or resolution of the city. The restrictions set forth in this paragraph shall not be deemed to preclude a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order directing that the information be provided to law enforcement officials if the information is reasonably described and is requested solely in connection with a criminal law enforcement action.
     (4) Recorded images obtained through the use of automatedspeed enforcement systems deployed as a means of promoting traffic safety in a city of the first class shall be destroyed within one year of final disposition of any recorded event, except that images subject to a court order under paragraph (2) or (3) shall be destroyed within two years after the date of the order, unless further extended by court order. A city of
the first class shall file notice with the department that the records have been destroyed in accordance with this section.
     (5) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, registeredmotor vehicle owner information obtained as a result of the operation of an automated speed enforcement system under this section shall not be the property of the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system and may not be used for any purpose other than as prescribed in this section.
     (6) A violation of this subsection shall constitute amisdemeanor of the third degree punishable by a $500 fine. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
    (g) Defenses.--
     (1) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person named in the notice of the violation was not driving the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. The owner may be required to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the time of the alleged violation. The city of the first class may not require the owner of the motor vehicle to disclose the identity of the driver of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation.
     (2) If an owner receives a notice of violation under thissection of a time period during which the motor vehicle was reported to any police department as having been stolen, it shall be a defense to a violation under this section that the motor vehicle had been reported to a police department as stolen prior to the time the violation occurred and had not been recovered prior to that time.
     (3) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the person receiving the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the offense.
     (4) It shall be a defense to a violation under thissection that the automated speed enforcement system being used to determine speed was not in compliance with section 3368 (relating to speed timing devices) with respect to testing for accuracy, certification or calibration.
    (h) Department approval.--
     (1) No automated speed enforcement system may be usedwithout the approval of the department, which shall have the authority to promulgate regulations for the certification and use of the systems, which regulations may include the use of radio-microwave devices, commonly referred to as electronic speed meters or radar, or light detection and ranging devices, commonly referred to as LIDAR, in their operations.
     (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, thedevices identified in paragraph (1) shall be tested for accuracy at regular intervals as designated by regulation of the department. (i)  Duty of city.--If a city of the first class elects to implement this section, the following provisions shall apply:
     (1) The city of the first class may not use an automatedspeed enforcement system unless there is posted an appropriate sign in a conspicuous place before the school zone in which the automated speed enforcement system is to be used notifying the public that an automated speed enforcement system is in use immediately ahead.
     (2) The city of the first class shall designate or appointthe Philadelphia Parking Authority as the system administrator to supervise and coordinate the administration of notices of violation issued under this section. Compensation under a contract authorized by this paragraph shall be based only upon the value of equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the automated speed enforcement system program and may not be based on the quantity of notices of violation issued or amount of fines imposed or generated.
     (3) The system administrator shall prepare a notice ofviolation to the registered owner of a motor vehicle identified in a recorded image produced by an automated speed enforcement system as evidence of a violation of section 3362 (relating to maximum speed limits). The notice of violation must be issued by a police officer employed by the police department with primary jurisdiction over the area where the violation occurred. The notice of violation shall have the following attached to it:
     (i) a copy of the recorded image showing the motorvehicle;
     (ii) the registration number and state of issuance ofthe motor vehicle registration;
     (iii) the date, time and place of the allegedviolation;
     (iv) notice that the violation charged is undersection 3365(b); and
     (v) instructions for return of the notice ofviolation, which shall read:
This notice shall be returned personally, by mail or by an agent duly authorized in writing, within 30 days of issuance. A hearing may be obtained upon the request of the registered owner of the motor vehicle.
(j)  System administrator.--
     (1) The system administrator may hire and designatepersonnel as necessary or contract for services with a manufacturer or vendor to implement this section.
     (2) The system administrator shall process notices ofviolation and penalties issued under this section.
     (3) Not later than September 1 annually, the systemadministrator shall submit an annual report to the chairperson and minority chairperson of the Transportation Committee of the
Senate and the chairperson and minority chairperson of the
Transportation Committee of the House of Representatives. The report shall be considered a public record under the Right-to-
Know Law and include for the prior year:
     (i) The number of violations and fines issued and dataregarding the speeds of motor vehicles in the enforcement area.
     (ii) A compilation of penalties paid and outstandingand violations contested.
     (iii) The amount of money paid to a systemadministrator, vendor or manufacturer under this section.
     (iv) The number of vehicular and pedestrian accidentsand related serious bodily injuries and deaths in the designated school zones.
    (k)  Notice to owner.--In the case of a violation involving a motor vehicle registered under the laws of this Commonwealth, the notice of violation must be mailed within 30 days after the commission of the violation or within 30 days after the discovery of the identity of the registered owner of the motor vehicle, whichever is later, and not thereafter to the address of the registered owner as listed in the records of the department. In the case of motor vehicles registered in jurisdictions other than this Commonwealth, the notice of violation must be mailed within
30 days after the discovery of the identity of the registered owner to the address of the registered owner as listed in the records of the official in the jurisdiction having charge of the registration of the motor vehicle. A notice of violation under this section must be provided to the registered owner within 90 days of the commission of the offense.
    (l) Mailing of notice and records.--Notice of violation must be sent by first class mail. A manual or automatic record of mailing prepared by the system administrator in the ordinary course of business shall be prima facie evidence of mailing and shall be admissible in any judicial or administrative proceeding as to the facts contained in it.
    (m) Payment of fine.--
     (1) An owner of the motor vehicle to whom a notice ofviolation has been issued may admit responsibility for the violation and pay the fine provided in the notice.
     (2) Payment must be made personally, through an authorizedagent, electronically or by mailing both payment and the notice of violation to the system administrator. Payment by mail must be made only by money order, credit card or check made payable to the system administrator. The system administrator shall remit the fine, less the system administrator's operation and maintenance costs necessitated by this section, to the department for deposit into a restricted receipts account in the Motor License Fund. Fines deposited into the fund under this paragraph shall be used by the department for a
Transportation Enhancement Grants Program as established by section 3116 (relating to automated red light enforcement systems in first class cities). The department shall award transportation enhancement grants on a competitive basis. The department may pay actual administrative costs arising from the department's administration of this section. The department may not reserve, designate or set aside a specific level of money or percentage of money to an applicant prior to the completion of the application process, nor may the department designate a set percentage of money to an applicant. Grants shall be awarded by the department based on the majority vote of a selection committee consisting of four representatives of the department appointed by the secretary and four members appointed by the mayor of the city of the first class, with the
secretary or a designee of the secretary serving as chairperson. Priority shall be given to applications seeking grant money for transportation enhancements in the municipality where the automated speed camera system is operated.
     (3) Payment of the established fine and applicablepenalties shall operate as a final disposition of the case.
    (n) Hearing.--
     (1) An owner of the motor vehicle to whom a notice ofviolation has been issued may, within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice, request a hearing to contest the liability alleged in the notice. A hearing request must be made by appearing before the system administrator during regular office hours either personally or by an authorized agent or by sending a request on the prescribed form.
     (2) Upon receipt of a hearing request, the systemadministrator shall in a timely manner schedule the matter before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be designated by the city of the first class. Written notice of the date, time and place of hearing must be sent by first class mail to the owner of the motor vehicle. A hearing to contest liability may be in-person or be conducted through live-stream synchronous video conferencing or similar virtual presence technology and shall be only at the locations and times set by the system administrator.
     (3) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with 2 Pa.C.S. Ch. 5 (relating to practice and procedure) and shall be subject to appeal under 2 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7 (relating to judicial review).
    (o) Compensation to manufacturer or vendor.--If a city of the first class has established an automated speed enforcement system, the compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the automated speed enforcement system may not be based upon the number of traffic citations issued or a portion or percentage of the fine generated by the citations. The compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the equipment shall be based upon the value of the equipment and the services provided or rendered in support of the automated speed enforcement system.
    (p) Revenue limitation.--A city of the first class may not collect an amount equal to or greater than 2% of its annual budget from the collection of revenue from the issuance and payment of violations under this section.
    (q) Expiration.--This section shall expire December 31, 2029.
(Dec. 14, 2023, P.L.344, No.38)
2023 Amendment.  Act 38 added section 3371. Section 5(2) of Act
38 provided that subsec. (e) shall take effect 60 days after the publication in the Pennsylvania Bulletin under section 4 of Act 38 and section 5(3) of Act 38 provided that the remainder of the section shall take effect in 60 days. Section 4 of Act 38 provided that the Secretary of Transportation shall transmit notice to the Legislative Reference Bureau for publication in the next available issue of the Pennsylvania Bulletin that an automated speed enforcement system is operational in the designated school zones under section 3371.
Chapter 33. - Title 75 - VEHICLES	https://www.palegis.us/statutes/consolidated/view-statute?15&iFrame=...
     
Chapter 33. - Title 75 - VEHICLES	https://www.palegis.us/statutes/consolidated/view-statute?15&iFrame=...
     
1 of 66	3/7/2026, 3:25 PM
     
1 of 66	3/7/2026, 3:25 PM
     
Chapter 33. - Title 75 - VEHICLES	https://www.palegis.us/statutes/consolidated/view-statute?15&iFrame=...
     
1 of 66	3/7/2026, 3:25 PM
     
