Standing General Order on Crash Reporting: For incidents involving ADS and Level 2 ADAS
Overview
Standing General Order
NHTSA has issued a Standing General Order (the General Order) requiring identified manufacturers and operators to report to the agency certain crashes involving vehicles equipped with automated driving systems or SAE Level 2 advanced driver assistance systems. The General Order allows NHTSA to obtain timely and transparent notification of real-world crashes associated with ADS and Level 2 ADAS vehicles from manufacturers and operators. With these data, NHTSA can respond to crashes that raise safety concerns about ADS and Level 2 ADAS technologies through further investigation and enforcement. If NHTSA finds a safety defect, it will take action to ensure that unsafe vehicles are taken off public roads or remedied, as appropriate.
NHTSA issued the General Order to evaluate whether the manufacturers of ADS and Level 2 ADAS systems and the vehicles equipped with them, including manufacturers of prototype vehicles and equipment, are meeting their statutory obligations to ensure that their vehicles and equipment are free of defects that pose unreasonable risks to motor vehicle safety. Prior to the implementation of the General Order, NHTSA’s sources of timely crash notifications were limited and generally inconsistent across manufacturers, including developers. The General Order was first issued in 2021 and amended in 2021, 2023 and 2025. Prior versions of the General Order are available in our Archive section.
Understanding the Differences: ADS vs Level 2 ADAS
Automated driving systems, still in development, encompass SAE Levels 3 through 5. In its mature state, a vehicle equipped with ADS aims to perform the entire dynamic driving task on a sustained basis within a defined operational design domain without driver involvement. 
Level 2 advanced driver assistance systems provide both speed and steering input when the driver assistance system is engaged but require the human driver to remain fully engaged in the driving task at all times.
Reporting Requirements
ADS: Entities named in the General Order must report a crash if ADS was in use at any time within 30 seconds of the crash and the crash resulted in certain property damage or injury.
Level 2 ADAS: Entities named in the General Order must report a crash if Level 2 ADAS was in use at any time within 30 seconds of the crash and the crash involved a vulnerable road user being struck or resulted in a fatality, an air bag deployment, or any individual being transported to a hospital for medical treatment.
Crash reporting criteria are stricter for ADS than ADAS to account for the higher level of automation in ADS and driverless operations in surface transportation. More information on the reporting requirements is available in the General Order.
Data and Limitations
Understanding the terms and requirements of the General Order, the data it aims to obtain, and the limitations of those data are crucial for accurate interpretation and analysis. See the Data section on this webpage for important considerations when reviewing these data and other information.
ADS
Observations from reported ADS crashes are presented in this section. It is important to note that these crashes are categorized based on the type of automation system reported to be engaged at the time of the incident. In prior versions of the General Order, reporting entities classified onboard automation systems as ADS when it was actually Level 2 ADAS (and vice versa). NHTSA is currently working with reporting entities to correct this information and to improve data quality in future reporting.
In prior General Orders, ADS crashes were presented in the chart below using the ADS-equipped data field. The third amended General Order streamlined the reporting requirements of the prior orders to maintain a focus on safety, and ADS crashes are now presented in the charts by using the type of automation system engaged prior to crash onset. When multiple versions of a report exist from a specific entity, the values from the latest report are used. Reports where the latest type of automation system engaged contains Unknown, see Narrative have not been included in these charts. There may be cases where more than one report is submitted for a crash, resulting in duplicate counts if sufficient information is not available to match the reports to the same crash.


